Table of Contents 
General Information | Page 5 

Howard University: An Overview | Page 5 

Mission Statement | Page 6 

Regional Accreditation | Page 6 

University Administration | Page 7 

Howard University Board of Trustees | Page 8 

Howard University Policy on Equal Opportunity | Page 10 

Campus Facilities and Space Utilization | Page 12 

Howard University 2021-2022 Academic Calendar | Page 22 

Faculty - Undergraduate 21-22 | Page 29 

Undergraduate Admissions | Page 42 

General Admissions Requirements | Page 42 

Application Deadlines & Early Action | Page 44 

Report of Medical History | Page 44 

First Time Student Admission Requirements | Page 44 

Transfer Student Admission Requirements | Page 45 

International First Time Student Admission Requirements | Page 46 

International Transfer Student Admission Requirements | Page 48 

Other Categories Seeking Undergraduate Admission: | Page 49 

Unclassified Students | Page 50 

Visiting Students | Page 50 

Summer School | Page 50 

Consortium of Universities of the Washington Metropolitan Area (CUWMA) | Page 51 

Placement Exams | Page 52 

Undergraduate Transfer Credit Policy | Page 54 

Financial Information | Page 55 

Enrollment Fee | Page 55 

Cost of Attendance | Page 55 

Expenses & Financial Aid | Page 56 

Payment Information | Page 56 

Minimum Credits Required for Financial Aid Eligibility | Page 58 

Financial Aid Probation | Page 58 

Federal Financial Aid Unofficial Withdrawal Policy | Page 61 

Howard University Refunds and Adjustments of Title IV Funds | Page 61 

Schedule of Financial Adjustments and/or Refunds | Page 62 

Explanation of Fees | Page 62 

Official Notice of Student Charges | Page 64 

Academic Advising & Policies | Page 78 

Academic Advisement | Page 78 

Registration | Page 79 

General Academic Information | Page 80 

Semester Grades | Page 82 

Satisfactory Academic Progress Policy | Page 82 

Course Repeat Policy | Page 86 

Change of Program: Audit, Variable Course Credits, Pass/Fail | Page 86 

Note on Credit Hours and Special Topics Courses | Page 86 

Pass/Fail Regulation | Page 87 

Change of Program Fee | Page 87 

Withdrawal From a Course | Page 87 

Warning on Dropping Courses | Page 88 

All Incomplete Grades | Page 88 

Removal of Incomplete Grades | Page 88 

Academic Suspension | Page 88 

Readmission Policy on Academic Probation & Suspension | Page 88 

Readmission After Academic Suspension | Page 89 

Attendance | Page 90 

Total Withdrawal Procedure | Page 90 

Readmission After a Total Withdrawal | Page 91 

Student Resources & Services | Page 91 

Photo Identification Cards | Page 91 

BisonWeb | Page 92 

Certification of Enrollment | Page 92 

Transcripts | Page 92 

The Office of Undergraduate Studies | Page 93 

The University Counseling Service | Page 93 

Various Student Services and Support | Page 93 

Bookstores | Page 96 

Student Records | Page 96 

Howard University Student Code Of Conduct and Judiciaries | Page 100 

Preamble | Page 100 

Section I: Scope, Limitations, and Applicability of the Code | Page 101 

Section II: Cooperation with Law Enforcement Authorities | Page 102 

Section III: Student Rights, Freedoms, and Responsibilities | Page 102 

Section IV: Emergency Action Suspensions and Involuntary Administrative Total Withdrawals | Page 103 

Section V: Emergency Action of Students Charged with a Criminal Act | Page 105 

Section VI: Filing a Complaint and Request for University Disciplinary Action and Notification to the Accused | Page 106 

Section VII: Initial Administrative Action on Allegations of Violations of the Code | Page 106 

Section VIII: Prohibited Behaviors | Page 107 

Section IX: University-Wide Disciplinary Hearing Boards and Hearings; Administrative Hearings and Officers; Appeals Hearings and Boards; Administrative Appeal hearings and Officers | Page 110 

Section X: Hearing Particulars | Page 113 

Section XI: Procedures for Conducting a Disciplinary Hearing | Page 114 

Section XII: Procedures for Conducting a Hearing by an Administrative Hearing Officer | Page 115 

Section XIII: Notification of Hearing Outcome | Page 116 

Section XIV: Disciplinary Sanctions | Page 116 

Section XV: Procedure for Readmission after Disciplinary Suspension | Page 118 

Section XVI: Appeal of a Disciplinary hearing Decision | Page 118 

Section XVII: Revisions of the Student Code of Conduct and Judiciaries | Page 120 

Academic Code of Student Conduct | Page 120 

Degree Revocation Procedures | Page 122 

Policy on Student Academic Grievance Procedures | Page 123 

Policy Statement Concerning the Use of; the Possession for Sale, Transfer, or Exchange of; Controlled Substances | Page 124 

Equal Opportunity Grievance Procedures | Page 125 

Degrees | Page 127 

College of Arts & Sciences | Page 127 

Military Science | Page 127 

African Studies | Page 127 

Afro-American Studies | Page 133 

Art | Page 139 

Art History | Page 139 

Ceramics | Page 143 

Design | Page 147 

Electronic Studio Art | Page 150 

Fashion | Page 156 

Interior Design | Page 158 

Painting | Page 161 

Photography | Page 166 

Sculpture | Page 169 

Biology | Page 174 

Criminology | Page 182 

Chemistry | Page 187 

Economics | Page 197 

English | Page 203 

History | Page 218 

Allied Health Education | Page 225 

Interdisciplinary Studies | Page 237 

Mathematics | Page 270 

Music | Page 298 

Philosophy | Page 436 

Physics | Page 442 

Political Science | Page 448 

Psychology | Page 454 

Sociology | Page 460 

Sociology and Criminology | Page 466 

Theatre Arts | Page 467 

World Languages | Page 491 

Spanish | Page 491 

Anthropology | Page 497 

Classics | Page 497 

Comprehensive Sciences | Page 497 

Health, Human Perform. & Leisure Studies | Page 498 

Honors | Page 509 

Humanities | Page 509 

College of Nursing & Allied Health Sciences | Page 509 

Division of Allied Health Sciences | Page 509 

Clinical Laboratory Sciences | Page 509 

Health Management Sciences Program | Page 512 

Nutritional Sciences | Page 518 

Nursing | Page 530 

Physician Assistant (PA) Program | Page 533 

Radiation Therapy Program | Page 533 

School of Education | Page 535 

Department of Human Development and Psychoeducational Studies (HDPES) | Page 536 

Department of Curriculum and Instruction (C&I) | Page 536 

Elementary Education | Page 536 

Human Development | Page 538 

College of Engineering and Architecture | Page 542 

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering | Page 542 

Civil Engineering | Page 542 

Computer Science | Page 545 

Electrical Engineering | Page 548 

Architecture | Page 551 

Chemical Engineering | Page 554 

Mechanical Engineering | Page 557 

Computer Engineering | Page 561 

School of Business | Page 564 

Management & Hospitality Management Department | Page 564 

Finance & International Business | Page 564 

Finance | Page 564 

International Business | Page 575 

Information Systems & Supply Chain Management | Page 581 

Accounting | Page 589 

Management | Page 592 

Business Law | Page 596 

Marketing | Page 596 

Cathy Hughes School of Communications | Page 600 

Communications | Page 600 

Department of Media, Journalism and Film (MJFC) | Page 600 

Media, Journalism & Film | Page 601 

Department of Strategic, Legal and Management Communication (SLMC) | Page 613 

Communication Sciences & Disorders | Page 613 

Radio, TV, & Film | Page 613 

Strategic, Legal & Management Communication | Page 613 

Course Descriptions | Page 631 

Army | Page 631 

Aerospace | Page 632 

African Studies | Page 634 

Afro-American Studies | Page 637 

Art | Page 641 

Art History | Page 644 

Art Management | Page 646 

Ceramics | Page 647 

Design | Page 648 

Drawing | Page 650 

Electronic Studio Art | Page 651 

Fashion | Page 653 

Foundation Design | Page 657 

Interdisciplinary | Page 660 

Interior Design | Page 661 

Painting | Page 663 

Photography | Page 665 

Sculpture | Page 668 

Experimental Studio Art | Page 670 

Biology | Page 670 

Chemistry | Page 681 

Economics | Page 687 

English | Page 692 

History | Page 710 

Allied Health Education | Page 722 

Interdisciplinary Studies | Page 724 

Mathematics | Page 724 

Music | Page 730 

Accompanying for Ensemble | Page 746 

Bassoon | Page 746 

Brass Ensemble | Page 747 

Clarinet | Page 747 

Fine Arts Guitar | Page 748 

Flute | Page 748 

French Horn | Page 749 

Fundamentals | Page 750 

Guitar | Page 752 

Guitar Ensemble | Page 753 

Harp | Page 754 

Instrument Repair | Page 755 

Instrumental | Page 755 

Literature | Page 757 

Marching Band | Page 760 

Oboe | Page 761 

Orchestra | Page 762 

Percussion Ensemble | Page 762 

Percussion Major | Page 763 

Piano | Page 764 

Piano Trio | Page 766 

Saxophone | Page 767 

Saxophone Ensemble | Page 768 

Jazz | Page 768 

String Bass | Page 770 

Jazz Ensemble | Page 771 

String Ensemble | Page 772 

Student Recital | Page 772 

Music Therapy | Page 773 

Trombone | Page 775 

Organ | Page 776 

Trumpet | Page 777 

Tuba | Page 778 

Piano Technology | Page 779 

University Choir | Page 780 

University Chorale | Page 781 

University Collegium | Page 781 

Viola | Page 782 

Voice | Page 783 

Violoncello | Page 785 

Woodwind Ensemble | Page 786 

Entertainment Law | Page 786 

Philosophy | Page 788 

Physics | Page 795 

Political Science | Page 801 

Psychology | Page 809 

Sociology | Page 818 

Theatre Arts | Page 823 

Theatre Arts Administration | Page 829 

Theatre Education | Page 831 

Theatre Foundation | Page 831 

Theatre Technology | Page 833 

Acting | Page 836 

Dance Arts | Page 840 

Pre-directing | Page 844 

Musical Theatre | Page 845 

World Languages | Page 847 

Amharic | Page 848 

Arabic | Page 848 

Somali | Page 849 

Chinese | Page 850 

French | Page 851 

German | Page 856 

Haitian Creole | Page 862 

Japanese | Page 863 

Korean | Page 864 

Portuguese | Page 864 

Russian | Page 865 

Spanish | Page 869 

Swahili | Page 874 

Wolof | Page 875 

Anthropology | Page 876 

Classics | Page 878 

Comprehensive Sciences | Page 886 

Health, Human Perform. & Leisure Studies | Page 887 

Honors | Page 895 

Humanities | Page 896 

College of Nursing & Allied Health Sciences | Page 897 

Clinical Laboratory Sciences | Page 898 

Health Management Sciences Program | Page 902 

Nutritional Sciences | Page 906 

Nursing | Page 909 

Radiation Therapy Program | Page 916 

School of Education | Page 921 

Elementary Education | Page 922 

Human Development | Page 928 

Civil Engineering | Page 930 

Computer Science | Page 936 

Electrical Engineering | Page 945 

Architecture | Page 957 

Chemical Engineering | Page 971 

Mechanical Engineering | Page 976 

Computer Engineering | Page 982 

Hospitality Management | Page 989 

Finance | Page 991 

Insurance | Page 994 

International Business | Page 995 

Information Systems & Supply Chain Management | Page 996 

Computer Based Information Systems | Page 996 

Accounting | Page 1001 

Management | Page 1003 

Business Law | Page 1007 

Marketing | Page 1008 

Communications | Page 1013 

Journalism | Page 1015 

Media, Journalism & Film | Page 1020 

Communication Sciences & Disorders | Page 1029 

Radio, TV, & Film | Page 1029 

Strategic, Legal & Management Communication | Page 1034 


General Information 
General Information 
Howard University: An Overview 
In November 1866, shortly after the end of the Civil War, members of the First Congregational Society of Washington considered establishing a theological seminary for the education of African-American clergymen. Within a few weeks, the concept expanded to include a provision for establishing a University. Within two years, the University consisted of the colleges of Liberal Arts and Medicine. The new institution was named for General Oliver O. Howard, a Civil War hero who was both a founder of the University and, at the same time, commissioner of the Freedman’s Bureau. 
The University charter as enacted by Congress and subsequently approved by President Andrew Johnson on March 2, 1867, designated Howard University as “a University for the education of youth in the liberal arts and sciences.” The Freedmen’s Bureau provided most of the early financial support of the University. In 1879, Congress approved a special appropriation for the University. The charter was amended in 1928 to authorize an annual federal appropriation for construction, development, improvement and maintenance of the University. 
Howard University as one of the nation’s leading research universities is dedicated to educating students from diverse backgrounds at the undergraduate, graduate, and professional level, with a particular focus on African-American students, as well as those of all other racial and ethnic groups from the United States and around the world. The University received its first accreditation from the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools in 1921 and has had its accreditation reaffirmed by the Association at every required interval thereafter. 
Howard is a unique university with a special mission that addresses the higher education needs of the nation and the world. Since its founding, Howard has been open to men and women from all racial and ethnic groups. The University has awarded more than 100,000 degrees in the arts, sciences and humanities. Howard ranks among the highest producers of the nation’s Black professionals in medicine, dentistry, pharmacy, engineering, nursing, architecture, religion, law, music, social work and education. The University has long held a commitment to the education and advancement of disadvantaged persons in American society and throughout the world. The goal is the elimination of inequities related to race, color, social, economic and political circumstances. 
The University’s academic programs are offered by 13 schools and colleges: the College of Arts and Sciences; the School of Business; the School of Communications; the College of Dentistry; the School of Divinity; the School of Education; the College of Engineering and Architecture; the School of Law; the College of Medicine, the College of Nursing and Allied Health Sciences; the College of Pharmacy; and the School of Social Work. 
The University library system, typifying Howard’s commitment to research, contains more than two million volumes and is a member of the Association of Research Libraries. Among the system’s many resources are the state-of-the-art, Louis Stokes Health Science Library and the Law Library, both of which opened in 2001. In addition, the Moorland-Spingarn Research Center houses one of the world’s largest and most comprehensive research collections dedicated to documenting the history and culture of people of African descent throughout the world. 
The University has an array economic, and informational of media outlets that address the educational, social, needs of the academic and wider communities. Its radio station, WHUR-FM, and television station, WHUT-TV, a PBS affiliate, serve the Washington metropolitan area and beyond. Each provides training laboratories that assist in preparing students for professional broadcasting and other careers. 
In addition to its collegiate programs, the University maintains an Early Learning Program and a Middle School of Science and Mathematics. The Early Learning Program offers pre-kindergarten through kindergarten programs and is accredited by the National Association for the Science and Mathematics is Education of Young Children. The Middle School of a District of Columbia Public Charter School providing curricula for grades 5 through 9. 
The University’s main campus is located in Washington, DC, within five miles of the United States Capitol and consists of more than 57 buildings on more than 89 acres of land. It also maintains a 22-acre West Campus in upper Northwest Washington, which houses the Law School. The 450 licensed-bed university hospital (Howard University Hospital) provides services for a significant segment of the Washington, DC metropolitan community, in addition to providing a clinical setting for training physicians, nurses, and other healthcare providers. 
The University competes in 17 varsity sports, including basketball, football, bowling, lacrosse, soccer, softball, swimming, tennis, both indoor and outdoor track and volleyball. Howard has more than 10,000 students from virtually every state, the District of Columbia and more than 70 countries. 
Today, Howard University is one of only 48 U.S. private, Doctoral/Research-Extensive universities. Its 10,500 students enjoy academic pursuits in more than 120 areas of study leading to undergraduate, graduate, and professional degrees. The University continues to attract the nation’s top students and produces more on-campus AfricanAmerican Ph.D.s than any other university in the world. Since 1998, the University has produced two Rhodes Scholars, three Truman Scholars, three Marshall Scholars, six Fulbright Scholars and nine Pickering Fellows. 
Contact Information 
Howard University 2400 Sixth Street, NW Washington, D.C. 20059 (202) 806-6100 www.howard.edu 

Mission Statement 
Howard University, a culturally diverse, comprehensive, research intensive and historically Black private university, provides an educational experience of exceptional quality at the undergraduate, graduate, and professional levels to students of high academic standing and potential, with particular emphasis upon educational opportunities for Black students. Moreover, the University is dedicated to attracting and sustaining a cadre of faculty who are, through their teaching, research and service, committed to the development of distinguished, historically aware, and compassionate graduates and to the discovery of solutions to human problems in the United States and throughout the world. With an abiding interest in both domestic and international affairs, the University is committed to continuing to produce leaders for America and the global community. 
Approved by the Board of Trustees, June 2009 

Regional Accreditation 
Howard University is accredited by the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools/Commission on Higher Education. Middle States Commission on Higher Education 3624 Market Street - Philadelphia, PA 19104 (215) 662-5606 
Undergraduate Programs with Specialized Accreditation 
Most current accreditation information can be found at: http://www.provost.howard.edu/Accreditation/ SpecAccreditation4-25-16.pdf 
Program  Accrediting Organization  
School of Business  Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business International  
School of Communications, Undergraduate programs in Journalism, Radio, Television and Film  Accrediting Council for Education in Journalism and Mass Communication (ACEJMC)  
School of Education  National Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE) The Distrcit of Columbia State Education Agency (DCSEA) American Psychology Associateion (APA)  
School of Engineering, Undergraduate Engineering Programs  Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology, Inc. (ABET)  
Department of Systems and Computer Science  Computer Sciences Accreditation Commission  
Department of Art  National Association of Schools of Art & Design  
Department of Music  National Association of Schools of Music  
Department of Theatre Arts  National Association of Schools of Theatre Arts  
Division of Nursing  Commission of Collegiate Nursing Education (CCNE)  
Clininal Laboratory Sciences  National Accrediting Agency for Clinical Laboratory Sciences  
Nutritional Sciences  Accrediatation Council for Edcuation in Nutrition and Dietetics  
Radiation Therapy  Joint Review Committee on Edcuation in Radiologic Technology  
Health Management Services  Association of University Programs in Health Administration  

 

University Administration 
PRESIDENT UNIVERSITY Wayne A.I. Frederick M.D., MBA hupresident@howard.edu 
PROVOST & CHIEF ACADEMIC OFFICER Anthony K. Wutoh, Ph.D. awutoh@howard.edu 
EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT AND CHIEF OPERATIONS OFFICER Tashni-Ann Dubroy, Ph.D., MBA tashni.dubroy@howard.edu 
SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT OF CORPORATE REALTIONS Debbi Jarvis debbi.jarvis@howard.edu 
SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT and CHIEF STRATEGY OFFICER Rashad Young rashad.young@howard.edu 
VICE PRESIDENT, CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER & TREASURER Michael J. Masch michael.masch@howard.edu 
VICE PRESIDENTOF COMMUNICATIONS & CHIEF COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER Frank Tramble, MPS frank.tramble@howard.edu 
VICE PRESIDENT & SECRETARY Florence W. Prioleau, Esq. fprioleau@howard.edu 
VICE PRESIDENT OF DEVELOPMENT David P. Bennett david.bennett@howard.edu 
ASSISTANT VICE PRESIDENT & CHIEF HUMAN RESOURCES OFFICER Larry Callahan larry.callahan@howard.edu 
INTERIM VICE PRESIDENT FOR STUDENT AFFAIRS Cynthia Evers, Ph.D. cynthia.evers@howard.edu 
VICE PRESIDENT OF RESEARCH Bruce Jones, Ph.D. bruce.jones@howard.edu 
VICE PRESIDENT OF CLINICAL AFFAIRS Hugh Mighty, MD hugh.mighty@howard.edu 
CHIEF OF STAFF & ASSISTANT VICE PRESIDENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS Paul Monteiro paul.monteiro@howard.edu 

Howard University Board of Trustees 
DR. LAURENCE C. MORSE, CHAIRMAN Co-Founder / Managing Partner Fairview Capital 
MS. LESLIE D. HALE, VICE CHAIR President and Chief Executive Officer, RLJ Lodging Trust 
MR. MARK A. L. MASON ,VICE CHAIR Chief Financial Officer, Citigroup 
DR. WAYNE A. I. FREDERICK President, Howard University 
MINNIE BAYLOR-HENRY, ESQ. President, Baylor-Henry and Associates 
DR. CHARLES BOYD Owner/Medical Director,The Boyd Cosmetic Surgical Institute 
MR. CHRIS CARR Chief Operations Officer,Sweetgreen 
DONALD B. CHRISTIAN, CPA, CISA Partner, PriceWaterhouseCoopers (PwC), US East Region Advisory Leader 
MR. GODFREY GILL Senior Vice President, Investor Relations Vista Equity Partners 
DR. RICHARD GOODMAN Executive Vice President (Ret.), PepsiCo 
REVEREND DR. MICHELE V. HAGANS President and Chief Executive Officer, Fort Lincoln New Town Corporation 
THE HONORABLE ALPHONSO JACKSON Senior Advisor to CEO (Ret., First Data Corporation) Fmr. U.S. Secretary of Housing and Urban Development 
THE HONORABLE MARIE C. JOHNS Chief Executive Officer, PPC-Leftwich 
MR. JAMES J. MURREN Chair, Nevada COVID-19 Response Relief and Recovery Task Force 
MS. HILARY ROSEN Policy Analyst, CNN Partner, SKDKnickerbocker 
DR. DANETTE G. HOWARD Chief Strategy Officer and Senior Vice President Lumina Foundation 
JILL B. LOUIS, ESQ. Partner Perkins and Coie LLP 
THE HONORABLE RONALD ROSENFELD Former Chair, Housing Financial Board 
MR. SHELLEY STEWART, JR. Managing Partner, BottomLine LLC 
MR. CHRIS WASHINGTON Grassroots Marketing Consultant, Professional DJ Asst. Athletics Director and Varsity Coach 
DR. REED V. TUCKSON Managing Director, Tuckson Health Connections, LLC 
MRS. BENAREE P. WILEY Principal, The Wiley Group 
Deans of Undergraduate Serving Schools and Colleges 
Arts & Sciences Rubin J. Patterson, Ph.D. 
Business Anthony D. Wilbon, Ph.D., PMP 
Communications Gracie Lawson-Borders, Ph.D. 
Education Dawn Williams, Ph.D. 
Engineering and Architecture John M.M. Anderson, Ph.D. 
Nursing and Allied Health Sciences Gina S. Brown, Ph.D., RN, MSA 

Howard University Policy on Equal Opportunity 
Howard University does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national or ethnic origin, gender, marital status, religion, disability, age, sexual preference, political affiliation or any other basis prohibited by Federal or District of Columbia law. This policy covers administration of the University’s educational policies, admission policies, scholarship and loan programs, other University administered programs, and employment. 
Inquiries regarding provisions for handicapped persons, equal opportunity and Title IX should be addressed to the appropriate person listed below: 
Section 504 Coordinator 
Glennis Dennis-Bacchus 1851 9th Street, NW Washington, DC 20001 (202) 238-2420 
Title IX Coordinator 
Angie Pope-Logan (Interim) 2400 6th Street, NW, Washington, DC 20059 TitleIX@howardedu 
Equal Opportunity Officer 
2244 10th Street, NW, Suite 407 Washington, DC 20001 (202) 806-5770 
TITLE IX 
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 prohibits sex discrimination in education programs and activities by recipients of federal funds. The interim Title IX Coordinator for Howard University is Angie Pope-Logan, who is located in the Office of the Provost, Administration Building, Suite 306, and can be reached at (202) 806-2550. 
SECTION 504 OF THE REHABILITATION ACT OF 1973 
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (P.L. 93-112, as amended P.L. 93-516) forbids discrimination against persons based on disability by recipients of federal funds. The Section 504 Coordinator, Glennis Daniels-Bacchus is located at 1851 9th Street, NW, 2nd Floor, Washington, DC 20001. Their telephone number is (202) 238-2420 and email address is oss.disabilityservices@howard.edu. 
ETHNIC ORIGIN DATA FOR COMPLIANCE REPORTING 
Title Vl of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, requires that no person in the United States shall, on the ground of race, color or national origin, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance from the U.S. Department of Education. 
To determine whether an institution adheres to the above, the Office of Civil Rights Planning in the U.S. Department of Education requires that: 
“Each recipient shall keep such records and submit to the responsible Department official or his designee timely, complete and accurate compliance reports at such times, and in such form and containing such information, as the responsible Department official or his designee may determine to be necessary to enable him to ascertain whether the recipient has complied or is complying with this part. In the case of any other recipient, such other recipient shall also submit such compliance reports to the primary recipient to carry out its obligations under this part.” Title 45 Subtitle A — Department of Education Sec. 80.6 (b) (1972). 
Consequently, Howard University must provide the US Department of Education with specific statistical student ethnic origin data. Each student, therefore, is asked to assist the University in complying with this requirement by providing this data when requested. 

Campus Facilities and Space Utilization 
Campus Map
ACADEMIC PROGRAMS & FACILITIES 
The university’s 12 schools and colleges support 58 categories of degree offerings and a total of 171 majors (2010 Facts). over the past ten years, 51 academic programs have been accredited. one program has not been reviewed, one program closed, and one program is seeking first-time accreditation. at the time of the Howard university self-study Report, 29 programs in eight schools/colleges were undergoing self-studies and external reviews for reaccreditation. 
COLLEGE OF ARTS AND SCIENCES (COAS) 
The College of Arts and Sciences is Howard University’s oldest and largest school, founded in 1867. COAS is divided into four divisions: fine arts, humanities, natural sciences, and social sciences. The honors program enrolls approximately 200 students by invitation only. 
The Division of Fine Arts includes the Department of Art, Department of Music, and Department of Theatre Arts. The Department of Art is an accredited institutional member of the national association of schools of Art Design and offers the following degrees: 
• 
Bachelor of Arts – BA (Art History, Art Management, Fashion Merchandising, Interior Design) 

• 
Bachelor of Fine Arts – BFA (Painting, Design, Printmaking, Photography, Ceramics, Sculpture, Electronic Studio, Experimental Studio) 

• 
Master of Arts – MA (Art History) 

• 
Master of Fine Arts – MFA (Studio Arts) 


The Department of Music offers the following programs of study: 
• 
Bachelor of Music (Music with Electives in Business, Composition, Music History, Jazz studies, Performance, Music Therapy) 

• 
Bachelor of Music Education 

• 
Master of Music (Performance or Jazz Studies) 

• 
Master of Music Education 


The Department of Theatre arts offers a BFA in Theatre Arts, as well as minors in theatre arts, dance arts, and technical theater. 
Howard university’s Division of Humanities includes the Departments of Classics; English; World Languages and Cultures; and Philosophy. 
The Department of Classics provides BA degrees in ancient Languages (Greek or Latin) and in Classical Civilization. 
The Department of English offers BA degrees in English with a focus on critical reading, analytical thinking, focused research, and precise writing skills. 
The Department of World Languages and Cultures offers BA degrees in French, German, Spanish, Russian and an undergraduate program leading to secondary teacher education certification in French and Spanish. 
The Department of Philosophy offers a BA degree. 
The Division of Natural Sciences includes the Departments of Biology; Chemistry; Physics, Comprehensive Sciences; Health, Human Performance and Leisure. 
The Biology Department has the largest enrollment of undergraduate majors in COAS. While not a degree program, the Comprehensive Sciences program provides a series of basic science courses critical to the core general education curriculum requirements for students enrolled in university baccalaureate degree-granting programs. The Center for Pre-professional Education organizes and directs programs that strengthen the motivation and preparation of undergraduate and graduate students for success in the curricula for the health professions. 
The Division of Social Sciences offers BA degrees in the Departments of African studies; Afro-American studies; Air Force ROTC; Army ROTC; Economics; History; Political Science; and Sociology and Anthropology. 
COAS is accredited by the following agencies: 
• 
American Alliance for Health, Physical Education, and Dance 

• 
National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education 

• 
American Chemical society 

• 
American Psychological Association 

• 
Middle states Association of Colleges and Schools 

• 
National Association for Sport and Physical Education 

• 
National Association of Schools of Art and Design 

• 
National Association of Schools of Music 

• 
National Association of Schools of Theatre 


The College of Arts and Sciences currently occupies space in nine buildings on the Central Campus. The aging buildings do not allow for flexibility and also constrain scheduling for various programs. Specific needs include additional lecture halls with updated A/V and acoustics, studio space for the Department of Fine arts, an observation room for psychology, improved laboratory space for the hard sciences, and improved technology for labs and classroom spaces. Additionally, the Math and Economics departments are housed in a building that was designed to be temporary and does not meet ADA requirements. 
COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING, ARCHITECTURE, AND COMPUTER SCIENCES (CEACS) 
The College of Engineering, Architecture and Computer Sciences is home to the Departments of Architecture; Chemical Engineering; Civil Engineering; Electrical and Computer Engineering; Mechanical Engineering; and Systems and Computer science. The vision of CEACS is to become a recognized leader in research and the creation of learning environments conducive to the solution of problems which transcend the boundaries of discipline and profession. 
The Howard University Science, Engineering, and Mathematics program (HUSEM) is a multidisciplinary program involving nine departments in CEACS and the College of Arts and Sciences. The goal of the HUSEM program is to promote academic achievement as well as increase the numbers of underrepresented minorities who receive baccalaureate and graduate degrees in STEM disciplines. 
Ideally all departments and colleges in the HUSEM program should be co-located in a facility conducive to cutting-edge research and collaboration. 
CEACS is accredited by the following agencies: 
• 
Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology, Inc. 

• 
Computer Science Accreditation Board 

• 
National Architectural Accrediting Board, Inc. 


The College of Engineering, Architecture, and Computer Science space needs are related to Howard university’s increased emphasis on science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. 
CEACS requires flexible classrooms with updated technology, as well as large studio spaces for the architecture program. 
CEACS is housed in three buildings on the west side of the Campus: Chemical Engineering, Downing Hall and the Howard Mackey Building. These three buildings face onto both Georgia avenue and 6th street. 
SCHOOL OF EDUCATION (HUSOE) 
Howard university school of Education (HUSOE) offers degree and certification programs through its three departments: Curriculum and Instruction; Educational Administration and Policy; and Human Development and Psychoeducational Studies. 
HUSOE offers four doctoral, 20 masters, and seven certificates of advanced studies programs, and one undergraduate degree: BS in Human Development with certification in early childhood education. 
The mission of Howard University’s school of Education is to prepare teachers, administrators, researchers, program evaluators, and human development professionals for leadership in urban and diverse educational settings; significantly influence the national education agenda for African-American children; conduct and disseminate research that supports the belief that all students can learn; and provide a research-based blueprint for developing professionals who are capable of creating environments that evoke the abilities and talents of all students. 
The School of Education is accredited by National Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education and the National Association of State Directors of Teachers Education and Certification. The PhD program in counseling psychology is accredited by the American Psychological Association. 
The majority of the spaces used by the school of Education are currently housed in a “temporary” building that is past its useful life. (Academic Support Building B) 
Recent renovation of Miner Hall has provided five classrooms that meet the needs of the School of Education; renovation of the remainder of the building would allow the School of Education to move out of academic support Building B and into space that is more appropriately designed for the school. 
HUSOE requires new space for research and teaching assistants, a curriculum library, observation rooms, and additional faculty offices. All School of Education space should be located in a single facility. 
SCHOOL SF SOCIAL WORK (SSW) 
The goals and objectives of the school of social Work emphasize preparation of advanced level Master of Social Work (MSW) professionals to practice at the local, national and international levels for the solution of human problems and to become leaders in their communities. SSW doctoral graduates are prepared for the professoriate, research and leadership. The School of Social Work is accredited by the Council on Social Work Education. 
The SSW’s facility needs updated technology, a more defined main entrance, and additional storage space. The existing facility is inadequate in size and configuration for SSW to increase its research capability in the future. 
SCHOOL OF BUSINESS 
The Howard University School of Business was founded in 1970 and has grown to prominence over the years. In 2006, its Master of Business Administration (MBA) programs were recognized by the Princeton Review as number one for “Greatest opportunities for minority students”, and number five for “most Competitive students.” 
The School of Business offers the following undergraduate degrees, as well as MBA programs: 
• 
Accounting 

• 
Hospitality Management Program 

• 
Finance International Business and insurance 

• 
Information Systems and Decision Sciences 

• 
Hospitality 

• 
Marketing 

• 
Management and Hospitality management 

• 
Supply Chain management 

• 
Executive Leadership Honors Program 

• 
Twenty-First Century Advantage Program 


The School of Business is accredited by the Association of Advanced Collegiate Schools of Business International. 
Existing space in classroom space was determined to be largely adequate for the School of Business; however, there is need for additional space to accommodate additional space needs such as seminar rooms and informal gathering space. All space used by the School of Business needs additional technology and security to protect investments. 
SCHOOL OF COMMUNICATIONS 
The School of Communications (SOC) offers four departments: Radio, Television and Film; Journalism; Communication and Culture; and Communication Sciences and Disorders. 
SOC offers an MFA in Film program; traditional scholarly programs are housed within the Graduate School. SOC is accredited by the accrediting Council on Education in Journalism and Mass Communications and the American Speech, Language and Hearing Association. 
The current location in the C.B. Powell Building (formerly Freedman’s Hospital) is undesirable due to the physical facility conditions, as well as the building layout. The many wings of the facility result in compartmentalization of the school, thereby limiting collaboration. Three Centers of Excellence are not physically located with the school, which is undesirable. 
SOC has worked extensively to plan a new facility, which would include state-of-the art technology, additional production studios and screening rooms, an auditorium, and opportunities for partnership with external groups. 
COLLEGE OF MEDICINE (HUCM) 
The College of Medicine was founded in 1868 and has a long history of providing excellent research and training programs, preparing students to deliver patient care in communities that have a shortage of physicians and public health professionals. 
HUCM is part of the Howard university Health sciences Center, which includes the Howard university Hospital (HUH); the College of Dentistry; the College of Pharmacy, Nursing and Allied Health Sciences; the Louis Stokes Health Sciences Library; and the Student Health Center. HUCM offers an MD degree, as well as a Master of Public Health. additionally, HUCM students may earn dual degrees with the Graduate school (MD/PhD) and the College of Arts & Sciences (BS/MD). 
The College includes the following departments: 
• 
Basic Sciences 

• 
Anatomy 

• 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 

• 
Microbiology 

• 
Pathology 

• 
Pharmacology 

• 
Physiology and Biophysics 

• 
Research Centers and Institutes 

• 
Cancer Center 

• 
Center for Infectious Diseases Management and Research 

• 
Center for Sickle Cell Disease 

• 
Collaborative Alcohol Research Center 

• 
General Clinical Research Center 

• 
Laboratory of Evolutionary Biology 

• 
National Human Genome Center 

• 
National Minority AIDS Education Training Center 

• 
Research Centers in Minority Institutions 

• 
Specialized Neuroscience Research Program 

• 
Women’s Health Institute 

• 
Clinical Science 

• 
Anesthesiology 

• 
Cardiology 

• 
Community and Family Medicine 

• 
Dermatology 

• 
Emergency Medicine 

• 
Medicine, Internal 

• 
Neurology 

• 
Neurosurgery 

• 
Obstetrics and Gynecology 

• 
Ophthalmology 

• 
Orthopedic Surgery 

• 
Pathology 

• 
Pediatrics and Child Health 

• 
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 

• 
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences 

• 
Radiation Oncology 

• 
Radiology/Imaging Services 

• 
Surgery 


The College of Medicine is accredited by the Liaison Committee on Medical Education Representing the American Medical Association and the Association of American Medical Colleges. 
The key issue impacting HUCM is the condition of the existing facilities. The three buildings - Cancer Center, Numa Adams Building and Seeley G. Mudd- are all over 50 years old and do not include appropriate space for modern teaching and learning techniques. Specific problems cited include need for small group meeting spaces, improvements to lecture hall technology, need for state of the art laboratory spaces, and additional office space to accommodate growth. Additionally, the existing building configuration does not encourage collaboration between scientists. 
COLLEGE OF DENTISTRY 
Established in 1881, the College of Dentistry is the fifth oldest dental school in the United States. The College includes the following departments: 
• 
Clinical Dentistry 

• 
Restorative Services 

• 
Preventive Services 

• 
Diagnostic Services Endontics 

• 
Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery 

• 
Pediatric Dentistry 

• 
Orthodontics 


Degrees offered include the Doctorate of Dental Science (DDS) as well as postdoctoral programs in oral and maxillofacial surgery, orthodontics, pediatric density, advanced education in general dentistry, and general practice residency. 
The College of Dentistry is accredited by the Commission on Dental Accreditation of the American Dental Association. 
The College of Dentistry noted the need for increased technology in teaching spaces and the old medical library facility. Some research space is provided in the building. 
COLLEGE OF PHARMACY, NURSING, AND ALLIED HEALTH SCIENCES (CPNAHS) 
The College is divided into the School of Pharmacy, the Division of Nursing, and the Division of Allied Health Sciences. 
The School of Pharmacy offers the Doctor of Pharmacy degree; a distance-learning based, non-traditional Doctor of Pharmacy degree program; and MS and PhD degrees in pharmaceutical sciences (pharmaceutics, medicinal chemistry and pharmacy administration) in conjunction with the Graduate School. 
The Division of Nursing offers baccalaureate and master’s degrees in nursing, and a post-master’s certificate in nursing (family nurse practitioner). 
The Division of Allied Health Sciences offers baccalaureate degrees in clinical laboratory science, nutritional sciences, radiation therapy and health management and certificate in primary care physician assistant; master's degrees in occupational therapy and physical therapy; and the master’s and doctoral degrees in nutritional sciences in conjunction with the Graduate School. 
The College of Pharmacy, Nursing, and Allied Health Sciences is accredited by the following agencies: 
• 
Accreditation Council for Occupational Therapy Education 

• 
Accreditation Council for Pharmacy Education 

• 
Accreditation Review Commission on Education for the Physician assistant, Inc. 

• 
American Occupational Therapy Association, Inc. 

• 
Association of University Programs in Health Administration Commission on Accreditation for Dietetics Education 

• 
Commission on Accreditation in Physical Therapy Education 

• 
Joint Review Committee on Education in Radiologic Technology 

• 
National Accrediting Agency for Clinical Laboratory Sciences 

• 
Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education 


The College of Pharmacy, Nursing, and Allied Health Sciences is located in three separate facilities across Central Campus. The three facilities are Annex I, Annex II and Chauncey Cooper. Annex II was intended to be a temporary facility. These facilities are largely in need of significant upgrades to address deferred maintenance issues. Ideally, all departments within the College would be co-located in a single facility with state-of-the-art laboratory spaces. The existing space occupied by the Department of Physical Therapy was noted to have been recently renovated and meeting the departments’ needs. 
GRADUATE SCHOOL 
The Graduate school offers extensive programs in a number of fields, with 18 master's degrees (63 major fields of study), three PhD degrees (29 major fields of study), and as well as the five first professional degree programs. 
Graduate programs: 
• 
African Studies – MA, PhD 

• 
anatomy – MS, PhD, MD/PhD 

• 
art History – MA 

• 
atmospheric sciences – MS, PhD 

• 
Biochemistry – MS, PhD, MD/PhD 

• 
Biology – MS, PhD, MD/PhD 

• 
Chemical Engineering – MS 

• 
Chemistry – MS, PhD, MD/PhD 

• 
Civil Engineering – MS 

• 
Communication, Culture & Media Studies – PhD 

• 
Communication sciences and Disorders – MS 

• 
Education – MA, MS, PhD 

• 
Economics – MA, PhD 

• 
Electrical Engineering – MEng, PhD 

• 
English – MA, PhD 

• 
Genetics – MS, PhD, MD/PhD 

• 
Health, Human Performance and Leisure Studies – MS 

• 
History – MA, PhD 

• 
Mass Communication and Media Studies – MA, PhD 

• 
Materials Science and Engineering – PhD 

• 
Mathematics – MS, PhD 

• 
Mechanical Engineering – MEng, PhD 

• 
Nutritional Science – MS, PhD 

• 
Pharmacology – MS, PhD, MD/PhD 

• 
Pharmaceutical Sciences – MS, PhD 

• 
Philosophy – MA 

• 
Physics – MS, PhD 

• 
Physiology - PhD, MD/PhD 

• 
Political Science – MA, MAPA, PhD 

• 
Psychology – MS, PhD 

• 
Social Work – MSW, PhD 

• 
Sociology – MA, PhD 

• 
Computer Science – MSCS 


Certificate programs: 
• 
College and University Faculty Preparation 

• 
Computer Security 

• 
International Studies 

• 
Women’s Studies 


The Graduate school is accredited by the Middle States Association of Colleges and schools. 
The Graduate school is located in Annex III. Ideally, the Graduate School would have strong adjacency to the College of Arts and Sciences and the College of Engineering, Architecture, and Computer Science, as well as Howard University’s professional schools. 
HOWARD UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL 
Located immediately south of Howard university’s academic facilities, the Howard University Hospital (HUH) is a Level One Trauma Center. Its origins in the historic Freedmen’s Hospital (now the C.B. Powell Building). HUH has become one of the most comprehensive health care facilities in the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area. In April 2007, HUH ranked number one among selected area hospitals on 19 quality measures published by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. HUH is the nation’s only teaching hospital located on the Campus of an HBCU. 
HUH operations are integrated with the academics of the university, particularly those of the schools and colleges focused on health sciences. The hospital offers students a superior learning environment and opportunities to observe or participate in ground-breaking clinical and research work approximately 300-350 beds for targeted patient types, such as hypertension, certain types of cancer, organ transplantation (kidneys), orthopedic surgery, and podiatry are provided. 
HUH operations are integrated with the academics of the university, particularly those of the schools and colleges focused on health sciences. The hospital offers students a superior learning environment and opportunities to observe or participate in ground-breaking clinical and research work with professionals who are changing the face of health care. 
Howard university Hospital facilities include: 
• 
Main Hospital Building 

• 
Tower Building 

• 
Cancer Center (shared with the university) 

• 
Medical Arts Building (shared with the university) 

• 
Mental Health Clinic 

• 
Two parking structures along Fifth Street NW, which are operated by a separate management company 


This campus' master plan did not include a full analysis of the hospital’s programmatic needs. This must take place within the context of a separate specialized master plan for the hospital. The Health Science Enterprise is conducting a strategic planning exercise that will form the basis for such a plan. 
During the course of interviews, some of the suggestions noted for HUH included the following: 
• 
Approximately 300-350 beds for targeted patient types, such as hypertension, certain types of cancer, organ transplantation (kidneys), orthopedic surgery, and podiatry with a training program. 

• 
Comprehensive approach to deferred maintenance liabilities. 


LIBRARIES 
The Howard University library system is comprised of a number of general and specialty libraries across the three campuses. The central library complex is located at the south end of the yard and includes Founders Library and the attached Undergraduate Library. Branch libraries include the Architecture Library (Howard Mackey Building), the Business Library (Classroom Building Four/School of Business), and the Social Work Library (Inabel Burns Lindsay Hall). The Louis stokes Health Sciences Library is located at the southern end of Central Campus and serves the Health Sciences Complex. 
A small library is located at the School of Divinity’s East Campus location, and the Law Library is located on the West Campus. 
The university is considering closing the Social Work Library and the Architecture Library because these facilities are too small to be sustainable, have duplicate materials, and are costly to operate. Collections would be moved to the Central Library Campus (Founders/Undergraduate Library). 
Special collections space includes: 
• 
Moorland-Spingarn Research Center – The Moorland-Spingarn Research Center is one of the world’s largest and most comprehensive repositories for the documentation of the history and culture of people of African descent in Africa, the Americas, and other parts of the world. This center is located within Founders Library. 

• 
Channing Pollock Theatre Collection – The Channing Pollock Collection contains the playwright’s published works, manuscripts, and personal correspondence with celebrities of his day; as well as clippings, photographs, programs, broadsides, and sheet music representing different phases of the theatrical and entertainment world. This collection is located in Founders Library. 

• 
Afro-American Studies Resource Center – The Center houses one of the premier collections of literary and social science publications on the black experience in America. This collection is located in Founders Library. 

• 
Ralph J. Bunche International Affairs Center Reading Room – This is a collection of about 1,000 books and current periodicals on various subjects in international affairs, including foreign policy, international law, diplomacy, politics, international trade, conflict resolution, economic development, strategic studies, military affairs, and international organizations. This collection is located at the Bunche Center. 


Founders Library was opened in 1938 (designed by Albert Irvin Cassell) and is home to the following uses: 
• 
Browsing Room 

• 
Moorland-Spingarn Research Center 

• 
Afro-American Resource Center 

• 
Digital Learning Classroom 

• 
Channing Pollock Theater Collection 

• 
Howard University Museum 

• 
Reference Room 

• 
Interlibrary Loan Services 

• 
Stacks 


The Undergraduate Library was opened in 1983 and is contiguous with Founders Library. This building houses study space, as well as stacks/collections storage. 
The Howard University Library system has more than 2.5 million volumes; 16,600 current journal subscriptions; 4.2 million microform pieces; 18,000 manuscripts; and thousands of audio-visual items. 
With the exception of the collections listed on the previous page, the university’s libraries do not house any special collections and do not have special temperature and humidity requirements. The most valuable collections are stored off-site in remote storage. 
The university is a member of the Association of Research Libraries and the Chesapeake Information and Research Library Alliance (CIRLA). CIRLA offers faculty and graduate students direct reciprocal borrowing privileges at member libraries, which include George Washington, Georgetown, University of Maryland, Johns Hopkins, and the University of Delaware. 
SPIRITUAL LIFE 
The Andrew Rankin Memorial Chapel serves as a center for cultural and religious activities of the university and is dedicated to fulfilling the spiritual and religious needs of the students, faculty and administration. Besides traditional Sunday services which are broadcast on WHUR, the Chapel also hosts on-Campus events and serves as a quasi-student affairs group (i.e., hosting alternative spring break to New Orleans). 
Built during the presidency of Jeremiah Rankin (1890- 1903), Andrew Rankin memorial Chapel was constructed in 1894-95 and was dedicated in 1896. Designated as a National Historic Landmark, Rankin Chapel has been served by four deans. Additionally, chaplains from a variety of denominations and ministries, the Friends of Chapel, the Chapel Assistants, the Chapel Ushers, and the Chapel Choir all support the ministry of Rankin Chapel. The Chapel Choir, which is noted for its excellence and inspiring music, is composed of members of the various university choirs, the alumni, and individuals from the wider community. 
Andrew Rankin memorial Chapel is 90 feet long and 50 feet wide, not including the tower. The Chapel has two floors: the first story was once used as the Howard university art Gallery and was remodeled in 1948 into a religious activities Center; the auditorium, on the upper floor, is the sanctuary. 
The Chapel holds about 500-600 people, but chapel services are nearly triple that at times, and nearly always double. These services are currently held in Cramton Auditorium. additional Dean of the Chapel space (offices/administration) is located next to the Chapel in the Carnegie Building. Other events held in the chapel include weddings, funerals, and some revenue-generating functions. There are also regular programs by both the Dean of the Chapel’s office and student organizations. 
The Rankin Chapel is identified as a national chapel, but it does not have the space required to serve this function. 

Howard University 2021-2022 Academic Calendar 
(Excluding Dentistry, Law, Medicine and Nontraditional Programs) 
FALL (FIRST) SEMESTER 2021 
Date Policy: Deadlines are listed according to the calendar date on which they fall, even if that date falls on a weekend or is a legal holiday. Such deadlines must be met by close of business of the business day immediately following a weekend or legal holiday. 
June 25, Friday  Early Processing deadline for receipt of all required Financial Aid documents for Fall 2020 Consideration. Documents include (but not limited to) Verification, Independent Status Petition, Special Circumstances Appeal, Satisfactory Academic Progress (SAP) Appeal, College Enrollment Verification, Authorization to Apply Title IV Funds  
July 1, Wednesday  Deadline for required health documents for new entrants  
July 12, Monday  Fall 2021 Statements available via BisonWeb 
 
August 6, Friday to August 15, Sunday  Residence Halls open for New Entrants and Continuing Students at 8AM. Department will notify all students of check in times and dates  
August 9, Monday  Payment-in-full due for Fall 2021 (ALL STUDENTS)  
August 13, Friday  Fall disbursement of financial aid to eligible students’ accounts with the Office Of Bursar  
August 16, Monday to August 20, Friday  ORIENTATION, ACADEMIC ADVISEMENT AND COURSE REGISTRATION, for all New Undergraduate Students  
August 23, Monday to September 3, Friday  LATE REGISTRATION/CHANGE OF PROGRAM PERIOD (Add or drop a course without a grade of "W," change from one section to another, change from credit to audit or audit to credit). Late registration fee assessed for all new registrations.  
August 23, Monday  FORMAL CLASSES BEGIN 
 
August 25, Wednesday  Deadline to enroll in the Payment Plan via TouchNet at 25% down payment (Enrollment Fee is required)  
August 27, Friday  Deadline for receipt of approved applications for Intra-University Transfer for Fall 2021 in the Office of the Registrar 
 
September 3, Friday  LAST DAY TO REGISTER FOR FALL 2021 Deadline to receive 100% refund of tuition/fees. Please note that the online Total Withdrawal Request Form must be submitted. Deadline for students to add, change or cancel meal plan charges  
September 6, Monday  UNIVERSITY CLOSED – Labor Day Observed  
September 13, Monday  Registration holds for Spring 2022 applied to all accounts with a balance greater than zero and late payment fees assessed.  
September 13, Monday to November 12, Friday  Graduation Application available via BisonWeb for Fall 2021 prospective candidates 
 
September 13, Monday  Deadline for instructors to submit Never Reported (NR) and Unofficial Withdrawal (UW) grades via BisonWeb for Fall 2021 
 
September 17, Friday  OPENING CONVOCATION 11:00 A.M. (Classes Suspended from 10:00 A.M. – 1:00 P.M.) Location: To Be Announced  
September 27, Monday  Deadline for students checking out of Residence Halls to receive 50% refund of housing charges. Students will be assessed 25% of housing charge upon checking out after this date. Deadline for students checking out of meal mandated Residence Halls to receive 50% refund of meal plan charges. Deadline to receive 50% refund of tuition/fees. Please note that the online Total Withdrawal Request Form must be submitted.  
October 1, Friday  2022-2023 Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) available 
Preliminary Enrollment Census date 
 
October 15, Friday  Deadline for instructors to submit Midterm grades via BisonWeb for Fall 2021 
 
October 22, Friday  Final Enrollment Census Date  
October 25, Monday to April 8, Friday  Graduation Application available via BisonWeb for Spring 2022 prospective candidates  
October 29, Friday  Deadline to receive 25% refund of tuition/fees (Last day for tuition/fee refunds). Please note that the online Total Withdrawal Request Form must be submitted. 
Deadline for students checking out of Residence Halls to receive 25% refund of housing charges 
Deadline for students checking out of meal mandated Residence Halls and/or withdrawing from the University to receive 25% of meal plan charges 
 
October 30, Saturday  College of Arts and Sciences Senior Comprehensive Examinations in major fields for prospective December 2021, May 2022 and Summer 2022 graduates  
November 1, Monday  Fall 2022 First-Time in College Early Action Admission Application deadline  
November 1, Monday  Priority deadline for receipt of 2022-2023 Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) for Prospective and Continuing Students  
November 1, Monday  Spring 2022 Registration begins for Continuing Students BisonWeb is available for registration from 9AM to midnight each day 
DAY  DATE  CLASSIFICATION  
Monday  November 1  Senior  
Tuesday  November 2  Junior  
Wednesday  November 3  Sophomore  
Thursday  November 4  Freshman & Unclassified  
Friday  November 5  Graduate  

 
 
November 11, Thursday  UNIVERSITY CLOSED – Veterans Day Observed  
November 12, Friday  LAST DAY TO WITHDRAW FROM A FALL 2021 COURSE  
November 12, Friday  LAST DAY TO COMPLETE A TOTAL WITHDRAWAL FROM THE UNIVERSITY https://www2.howard.edu/withdrawal (No refunds) 
 
November 24, Wednesday  Classes and University Services Suspended at NOON 
 
November 25, Thursday to November 28, Sunday  UNIVERSITY CLOSED - THANKSGIVING RECESS  
December 3, Friday  FORMAL CLASSES END 
DEADLINE FOR STUDENTS TO CLEAR SPRING 2021 INCOMPLETE GRADES WITH INSTRUCTORS 
Deadline for prospective Fall 2021 Graduates to apply for graduation via BisonWeb 
Deadline for academic deans to submit Special Grade Reports to the Office of the Registrar for removal of Spring 2021 incomplete grades 
 
December 4, Saturday to December 5, Sunday  Reading Period  
December 6, Monday to December 7, Tuesday  DEPARTMENTAL EXAMINATIONS - To be conducted online 
Departments  Examination Dates  Examination Times  
English  Monday, December 6th  8:00 a.m. – 10:00 a.m.  
French 001, 002, & 003  Monday, December 6th  3:30 p.m. – 5:30 p.m.  
Spanish 001, 002 & 003  Monday, December 6th  1:00 p.m. – 3:00 p.m  
Social Sciences  Monday, December 6th  3:30 p.m. – 5:30 p.m.  
General Physics  Monday, December 6th  10:30 a.m. – 12:30 p.m.  
Economics 001 & 002  Tuesday, December 7th  8:00 a.m. – 10:00 a.m.  
Comprehensive Sciences  Tuesday, December 7th  1:00 p.m. – 3:00 p.m.  
Classical Mythology  Tuesday, December 7th  1:00 p.m. – 3:00 p.m.  
Mathematics  Tuesday, December 7th  3:30 p.m. – 5:30 p.m.  

 
 
December 8, Wednesday to December 14, Tuesday  FINAL EXAMINATIONS - To be conducted online 
(Deadline for instructors to submit final grades via BisonWeb is five calendar days after the scheduled final examination) 
Class Meeting Time  Examination Date  Examination Time  
MWF 8:10 a.m.  Wednesday, December 8th  8:00 a.m. – 10:00 a.m.  
MWF 9:10 a.m.  Wednesday, December 8th  11:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m.  
MWF 10:10 a.m  Wednesday, December 8th  2:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m.  
MWF 11:10 a.m.  Wednesday, December 8th  5:00 p.m. – 7:00 p.m.  
MWF 12:10 p.m.  Friday, December 10th  8:00 a.m. – 10:00 a.m.  
MWF 1:10 p.m.  Friday, December 10th  11:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m.  
MWF 2:10 p.m.  Friday, December 10th  2:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m.  
MWF 3:10 p.m.  Friday, December 10th  5:00 p.m. – 7:00 p.m.  
MWF 4:10 p.m.  Monday, December 13th  8:00 a.m. – 10:00 a.m.  
MWF 5:10 p.m.  Monday, December 13th  11:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m.  
MWF 6:10 p.m.  Monday, December 13th  2:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m.  
MWF 7:10 p.m.  Monday, December 13th  5:00 p.m. – 7:00 p.m  
TR 8:10 a.m.  Thursday, December 9th  8:00 a.m. – 10:00 a.m.  
TR 9:40 a.m.  Thursday, December 9th  11:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m.  
TR 11:10 a.m.  Thursday, December 9th  2:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m.  
TR 12:40 p.m  Thursday, December 9th  5:00 p.m. – 7:00 p.m.  
TR 2:10 p.m.  Tuesday, December 14th  8:00 a.m. – 10:00 a.m.  
TR 3:40 p.m.  Tuesday, December 14th  11:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m.  
TR 5:10 p.m  Tuesday, December 14th  2:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m.  
TR 6:40 p.m.  Tuesday, December 14th  5:00 p.m. – 7:00 p.m.  
TR 7:10 p.m.  Tuesday, December 14th  5:00 p.m. - 7:00 p.m.  

 
 
December 10, Friday  Spring 2022 Statements available via BisonWeb 
 
December 14, Tuesday  FIRST SEMESTER ENDS 
Official GRADUATION DATE for Fall 2021-degree recipients 
 
December 15, Wednesday  Residence Halls close at NOON, including Mazza Grandmarc & WISH Woodley Park  
December 20, Monday to January 2, Sunday 2022  UNIVERSITY CLOSED - WINTER RECESS  

SPRING (SECOND) SEMESTER 2022 
January 3, Monday  Payment in Full Due – Spring 2022 (All Students) 
Spring disbursement of financial aid to eligible student’s accounts with the Office of Bursar 
 
January 6, Thursday  Residence Halls open for check-in for New Residents at 10:00 A.M.  
January 7, Friday  ORIENTATION, ACADEMIC ADVISEMENT, COURSE REGISTRATION, and PAYMENT of tuition/fees for all New Undergraduate Students 
Residence Halls open for check-in for Continuing Students at 10:00 A.M. 
 
January 10, Monday to January 28, Friday  LATE REGISTRATION/CHANGE OF PROGRAM PERIOD (Add or drop a course without a grade of "W," change from one section to another, change from credit to audit or audit to credit). Late registration fee assessed for all new registrations.  
January 17, Monday  UNIVERSITY CLOSED – Martin Luther King, Jr.’s Birthday Observed 
Deadline to enroll in the Payment Plan via TouchNet at 25% down payment (Enrollment Fee is required) 
 
January 18, Tuesday  FORMAL CLASSES BEGIN  
January 21, Friday  Deadline to receive 100% refund of tuition/fees. Please note that the online Total Withdrawal Request Form must be submitted. 
Payment-in-full is due for students who register for the first time during the late registration period 
Deadline for receipt of December 2021 Graduation Recommendations in the Office of the Registrar 
Deadline for receipt of approved applications for Intra-University Transfers for Spring 2022 in Office of the Registrar 
Deadline for students to add, change or cancel meal plan charges 
Deadline for students checking out of Residence Halls to receive 50% refund of housing charges 
Deadline for students checking out of meal mandated Residence Halls and/or withdrawing from the University to receive 50% of meal plan charges 
 
January 28, Friday  LAST DAY TO REGISTER FOR SPRING 2022  
January 31, Monday  Financial holds applied to all accounts with a balance greater than zero and late payment fees assessed. 
Deadline for instructors to submit Never Reported (NR) and Unofficial Withdrawal (UW) grades via BisonWeb for Spring 2022 
 
February 15, Tuesday  Regular Decision deadline for receipt of First-Time in College applications for admission for Fall 2022 
Preliminary Enrollment Census date 
Review room selection eligibility for housing selection 2022-2023 
 
February 21, Monday  UNIVERSITY CLOSED – Presidents Day Observed  
February 22, Tuesday  Deadline to receive 50% refund of tuition/fees. Please note that the online Total Withdrawal Request Form must be submitted.  
March 4, Friday  CHARTER DAY CONVOCATION Cramton Auditorium, 11:00 A.M. (Classes suspended from 10:00 A.M. - 1:00 P.M.) 
 
March 4, Friday  Deadline for instructors to submit Midterm grades vis BisonWeb 
 
March 5, Saturday to March 13, Sunday  UNIVERSITY CLOSED. SPRING RECESS. No dining services provided during recess.  
March 11, Friday  Final Enrollment Census date Deadline to receive 25% refund of tuition/fees (Last day for tuition/fee refunds). Please note that the online Total Withdrawal Request Form must be submitted.  
March 26, Saturday  Senior Comprehensive Examination in major fields for College of Arts and Sciences prospective May, Summer, and December 2022 graduates  
March 28, Monday to April 8, Friday  Eligible students may make online housing selections based on eligibility, priority and availability (Continuing Students Only)  
April 8, Friday  LAST DAY TO WITHDRAW FROM A Spring 2022 COURSE 
LAST DAY TO COMPLETE A TOTAL WITHDRAWAL FROM THE UNIVERSITY https://www2.howard.edu/withdrawal (No Refunds) 
Deadline for prospective Spring 2022 graduates to apply for graduation via BisonWeb 
 
April 11, Monday to April 15, Friday  Fall 2022 Registration begins for Continuing Students BisonWeb is available for registration from 9AM to midnight each day 
DAY  DATE  CLASSIFICATION  
Monday  April 11  Senior  
Tuesday  April 12  Junior  
Wednesday  April 13  Sophomore  
Thursday  April 14  Freshman & Unclassified  
Friday  April 15  Graduate  

 
 
April 18, Monday  Summer 2022 Registration begins for Continuing Students BisonWeb is available for registration from 9AM to midnight each day 
 
April 18, Monday to July 1, Friday  Graduation Application available via BisonWeb for Summer 2022 prospective candidates  
April 19, Tuesday to April 21, Thursday  FINAL EXAMINATIONS FOR PROSPECTIVE SPRING 2022 GRADUATES  
April 22, Friday  FORMAL CLASSES END DEADLINE FOR INSTRUCTORS TO SUBMIT GRADES FOR PROSPECTIVE GRADUATES 
Deadline for students to clear Fall 2021 incomplete grades with instructors 
 
April 22, Friday to April 24, Sunday  Reading Period  
April 25, Monday to April 26, Tuesday  DEPARTMENTAL EXAMINATIONS 
(Deadline for instructors to submit final grades via BisonWeb is five calendar days after the scheduled final examination) 
Departments  Examination Dates  Examination Times  
English  Monday, April 25th  8:00 a.m. – 10:00 a.m.  
French 001, 002, & 003  Monday, April 25th  3:30 p.m. – 5:30 p.m.  
Spanish 001, 002 & 003  Monday, April 25th  1:00 p.m. – 3:00 p.m  
Social Sciences  Monday, April 25th  3:30 p.m. – 5:30 p.m.  
General Physics  Monday, April 25th  10:30 a.m. – 12:30 p.m.  
Economics 001 & 002  Tuesday, April 26th  8:00 a.m. – 10:00 a.m.  
Comprehensive Sciences  Tuesday, April 26th  1:00 p.m. – 3:00 p.m.  
Classical Mythology  Tuesday, April 26th  1:00 p.m. – 3:00 p.m.  
Mathematics  Tuesday, April 26th  3:30 p.m. – 5:30 p.m.  

 
April 27, Wednesday to May 3, Tuesday  FINAL EXAMINATIONS 
(Deadline for instructors to submit final grades via BisonWeb is five calendar days after the scheduled final examination) 
Class Meeting Time  Examination Date  Examination Time  
MWF 8:10 a.m.  Wednesday, April 27th  8:00 a.m. – 10:00 a.m.  
MWF 9:10 a.m.  Wednesday, April 27th  11:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m.  
MWF 10:10 a.m.  Wednesday, April 27th  2:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m  
MWF 11:10 a.m  Wednesday, April 27th  5:00 p.m. – 7:00 p.m.  
MWF 12:10 p.m.  Friday, April 29th  8:00 a.m. – 10:00 a.m.  
MWF 1:10 p.m.  Friday, April 29th  11:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m.  
MWF 2:10 p.m.  Friday, April 29th  2:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m.  
MWF 3:10 p.m.  Friday, April 29th  5:00 p.m. – 7:00 p.m.  
MWF 4:10 p.m.  Monday, May 2nd  8:00 a.m. – 10:00 a.m.  
MWF 5:10 p.m.  Monday, May 2nd  11:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m.  
MWF 6:10 p.m  Monday, May 2nd  2:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m.  
MWF 7:10 p.m.  Monday, May 2nd  5:00 p.m. – 7:00 p.m.  
TR 8:10 a.m.  Thursday, April 28th  8:00 a.m. – 10:00 a.m  
TR 9:40 a.m.  Thursday, April 28th  11:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m.  
TR 11:10 a.m.  Thursday, April 28th  2:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m  
TR 12:40 p.m.  Thursday, April 28th  5:00 p.m. – 7:00 p.m.  
TR 2:10 p.m.  Tuesday, May 3rd  8:00 a.m. – 10:00 a.m  
TR 3:40 p.m.  Tuesday, May 3rd  11:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m.  
TR 5:10 p.m.  Tuesday, May 3rd  2:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m.  
TR 6:40 p.m.  Tuesday, May 3rd  5:00 p.m. – 7:00 p.m.  
TR 7:10 p.m.  Tuesday, May 3rd  5:00 p.m. - 7:00 p.m.  

NOTE: FOR THOSE CLASSES THAT MEET ONCE WEEKLY OR AT A TIME NOT SHOWN ABOVE, THE INSTRUCTOR SHOULD SCHEDULE, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE STUDENT(S) INVOLVED, THE FINAL EXAM (IF ANY) WITH THEIR DEPARTMENT CHAIR TO ARRANGE FOR AN EXAMINATION ROOM 
 
April 29, Friday  DEADLINE FOR ACADEMIC DEANS TO SUBMIT SPECIAL GRADE REPORTS TO THE OFFICE OF THE REGISTRAR FOR REMOVAL OF INCOMPLETE GRADES FOR FALL 2021  
May 4, Wednesday  SECOND SEMESTER ENDS 
Deadline for receipt of Spring 2022 Graduation Recommendations in the Office of the Registrar 
 
May 5, Wednesday  Deadline for receipt of Spring 2021 Graduation Recommendations in the Office of the Registrar  
May 7, Saturday  COMMENCEMENT 
Upper Quadrangle - Main Campus, 10:00 A.M. 
 
May 8, Sunday  Check out of Residence Halls for all undergraduate students at 12:00 P.M.  
May 9, Monday  Check out of Residence Halls for all Spring 2022 graduates at 12:00 P.M.  
May 13, Friday  Evaluate Satisfactory Academic Progress (SAP) for 2022-2023 
Residence Halls open for check-in of Summer Session I residents 
 
May 27, Friday  Priority deadline for Satisfactory Academic Progress (SAP) Appeals for the 2022- 2023 academic year  
June 3, Friday  Priority Processing Deadline for receipt of all required Financial Aid Documents for Fall 2022 consideration. Documents include (but not limited to) Verification, Independent Status Petition, Special Circumstances Appeal, College Enrollment Verification, Authorization to Apply Title IV Funds  

SUMMER SCHOOL 2022 
SESSION I: May 23 to June 26 
Registration: May 19 to 23 
 SESSION II: June 27 to July 31 
Registration: June 23 to 27 
 

SUMMER SESSION I 
May 13, Friday  Summer I Financial Aid disbursements for eligible students  
May 19, Thursday to May 23, Monday  REGISTRATION for all students; Payment in-full is due upon registration 
(Add or drop a course without a grade of "W," change from one section to another, change from credit to audit or audit to credit) 
Consortium Registration 
 
May 23, Monday  FORMAL CLASSES BEGIN 
Payment Due in Full for Summer Registration (All Students) 
Deadline to receive 100% refund of tuition/fees. Please note that the online Total Withdrawal Request Form must be submitted. 
 
May 25 Wednesday  Summer Registration Disenrollment due to nonpayment  
May 30, Monday  Deadline to receive 50% refund of tuition/fees. Please note that the online 
Total Withdrawal Request Form must be submitted. 
 
May 30, Monday  UNIVERSITY CLOSED - Memorial Day Observed  
June 3, Friday  Graduation holds applied for Summer 2022 graduates 
 
June 6, Monday  Deadline to receive 25% refund of tuition/fees. (Last day for tuition/fee refunds). Please note that the online Total Withdrawal Request Form must be submitted. 
LAST DAY TO WITHDRAW FROM A COURSE 
 
June 22, Wednesday  LAST DAY TO COMPLETE A TOTAL WITHDRAWAL FROM THE UNIVERSITY (Summer Session 1) (No Refunds)  
June 22, Wednesday  FORMAL CLASSES END 
 
June 23, Thursday to June 25, Saturday  FINAL EXAMINATIONS 
(Deadline for instructors to submit final grades via BisonWeb is 3 calendar days after the scheduled final examination) 
 
June 25, Saturday  Deadline for faculty to submit Unofficial Withdrawal (UW) and Never 
Reported (NR) status reports via BisonWeb for Summer Session I 2022 
 
June 25, Saturday  Official GRADUATION DATE for Summer 2022-degree recipients in the Colleges of Dentistry, Medicine and Pharmacy only  
June 26, Sunday  FIRST FIVE-WEEK SUMMER SESSION ENDS 
Residence Halls close for Summer Session I residents 
 

FINAL EXAMINATION SCHEDULE FOR SUMMER SESSION I 
June 23, Thursday  6:30 A.M. - 8:30 A.M.  
June 23, Thursday  8:00 A.M. - 10:00 A.M.  
June 24, Friday  8:00 A.M. - 10:00 A.M.  
June 25, Saturday  9:00 A.M. - 11.00 A.M.  
June 23, Thursday  11:00 A.M. - 1:00 P.M.  
June 24, Friday  11:00 A.M. - 1:00 P.M.  
June 23, Thursday  2:00 P.M. - 4:00 P.M.  
June 24, Friday  2:00 P.M. - 4:00 P.M.  
June 23, Thursday  6:00 P.M. - 8:00 P.M.  
June 24, Friday  6:00 P.M. - 8:00 P.M.  

SUMMER SESSION II 
June 17, Friday  Summer II Financial Aid disbursements for eligible students  
June 23, Thursday to June 27, Monday  REGISTRATION for all students; Payment in-full is due upon registration (Add or drop a course without a grade of "W," change from one section to another, change from credit to audit or audit to credit) 
Consortium Registration 
 
June 24, Friday  Residence Hall check-in for Summer Session II residents at 10:00 A.M.  
June 27, Monday  FORMAL CLASSES BEGIN 
Payment Due in Full for Summer Registration (All Students) 
Deadline to receive 100% refund of tuition/fees. Please note that the online Total Withdrawal Request Form must be submitted. 
 
June 29, Wednesday  Summer Registration Disenrollment due to nonpayment  
July 1, Friday  Deadline for prospective Summer 2022 graduates to apply for graduation via BisonWeb 
Priority deadline for Satisfactory Academic Progress (SAP) Appeals for 2022-2023 Academic Year 
 
July 4, Monday  Deadline to receive 50% refund of tuition/fees. Please note that the online Total Withdrawal Request Form must be submitted. 
UNIVERSITY CLOSED - Independence Day Observed 
 
July 11, Monday  Deadline to receive 25% refund of tuition/fees. (Last day for tuition/fee refunds). Please note that the online Total Withdrawal Request Form must be submitted. 
LAST DAY TO WITHDRAW FROM A COURSE 
 
July 27, Wednesday  LAST DAY TO COMPLETE A TOTAL WITHDRAWAL FROM THE UNIVERSITY (for Summer Session II) (No Refunds)  
July 27, Wednesday  FORMAL CLASSES END  
July 27, Wednesday to July 29, Friday  FINAL EXAMINATIONS 
(Deadline for instructors to submit final grades via BisonWeb is 3 calendar days after the scheduled final examination) 
 
July 30, Saturday  Residence Halls close for Summer Session II residents  
July 31, Sunday  SECOND FIVE-WEEK SUMMER SESSION ENDS 
Deadline for faculty to submit Unofficial Withdrawal (UW) and Never Reported (NR) status reports via BisonWeb for Summer Session II 2022 
 
July 31, Sunday  Official GRADUATION DATE for Summer 2022-degree recipients 
Deadline for receipt of Summer 2022 Graduation Recommendations in the Office of the Registrar 
 

FINAL EXAMINATION SCHEDULE FOR SUMMER SESSION II 
July 27, Wednesday  6:30 A.M. - 8:30 A.M.  
July 27, Wednesday  8:00 A.M. - 10:00 A.M.  
July 28, Thursday  8:00 A.M. - 10:00 A.M.  
July 29, Friday  9:00 A.M. - 11.00 A.M.  
July 27, Wednesday  11:00 A.M. - 1:00 P.M.  
July 28, Thursday  11:00 A.M. - 1:00 P.M.  
July 27, Wednesday  2:00 P.M. - 4:00 P.M.  
July 28, Thursday  2:00 P.M. - 4:00 P.M.  
July 27, Wednesday  6:00 P.M. - 8:00 P.M.  
July 28, Thursday  6:00 P.M. - 8:00 P.M.  

 

Faculty - Undergraduate 21-22 
FACULTY  
College of Arts & Sciences  
Manahil  Abdalhameed  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Loay  Abdulrahman  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Shawn  Abernathy  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Kolapo  Abimbola  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Ofosuwa  Abiola  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Vanessa  Abrams  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Terri  Adams-Fuller  Ph.D.  Professor  
Adeniran  Adeboye  Ph.D.  Master Instructor  
Clement  Akassi  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Monique  Akassi  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Marjan  Alaghmand  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Marcus  Alfred  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Maryan  Ali  M.Ed.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Virginie  Aline  MA  Lecturer  
Lori  Allan  M.F.A.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Anna  Allen  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Rachelle  Allen-McFarlane  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Amirhossein  Amini Behbahani  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Lila  Ammons  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Ronald  Anderson  MFA  Associate Professor  
Ana Lucia  Araujo  Ph.D.  Professor  
Patricia  Ashton  MA/MS  Adjunct Lecturer  
Joseph  Asike  Ph.D.  Professor  
Joseph  Augustine  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Gabriel  Ayine  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Oritsegbubenmi  Ayu  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
George  Azobi  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Deniz  Baglan  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Oladapo  Bakare  Ph.D.  Professor  
Luther  Barden  Ph.D.  Professor  
Antoinette  Barksdale  J.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Mark  Bartley  MFA  Associate Professor  
Mario  Beatty  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Sandy  Bellamy  J.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Faina  Berezovskaya  Ph.D.  Professor  
Linda  Berg-Cross  Ph.D.  Professor  
Andrew  Bertaina  MFA  Lecturer  
Erin  Bevel  J.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Kim  Bey  MFA  Professor  
Paul  Bezandry  Ph.D.  Professor  
Laurie  Blackman  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Myles  Blakemore  M.M.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Emily  Blank  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Sara  Boissonneau  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Anney  Bolgiano  M.F.A.  Lecturer  
Algris  Bolton  MA  Adjunct Lecturer  
Vernon  Bond  Ed.D.  Professor  
Thomas  Bonier  B.A.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Ashley  Booher  MM  Adjunct Lecturer  
Khalid  Boushaba  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Douglas  Bowles  MM  Master Instructor  
Alfred  Boykin  Ph.D.  Professor  
Jessica  Boykin-Settles  MM  Assistant Professor  
Rebecca  Boylan  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
James  Bridgers  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Ned  Britt  Ed.D.  Lecturer  
Brielle  Brookins  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Khalila  Brown  Ph.D.  Master Instructor  
Summer  Brown  MFA  Adjunct Lecturer  
Byron  Brown  MA  Lecturer  
Michael A  Brown  B.F.A.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Luke  Brown  M.A.  Lecturer  
Kent  Bryant  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Flordeliz  Bugarin  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Michael  Bunn  MM  Adjunct Lecturer  
Janelle  Burke  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Yvonne  Burnley  JD  Adjunct Lecturer  
Alexander  Burstein  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Raymond  Butcher  Ph.D.  Professor  
Mohamed  Camara  Ph.D.  Professor  
Alfonso  Campbell  Ph.D.  Professor  
Michael  Campbell  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Joyce  Camper  MFA  Adjunct Lecturer  
Jacqueline  Carmichael  MFA  Assistant Professor  
Greg  Carr  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Niambi  Carter  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Jacoby  Carter  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Adrienne  Carthon  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Daniel  Casimir  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Mbye  Cham  Ph.D.  Professor  
Senhuei  Chen  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Yu-Ting  Chen  MA  Lecturer  
Cyrus  Chestnut  BA  Master Instructor  
Barbra  Chin  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Sugata  Chowdhury  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Marc  Christophe  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Msia  Clark  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Bruce  Clark  MS  Lecturer  
Elizabeth  Clark-Lewis  Ph.D.  Professor  
Alois  Clemons  MA  Lecturer  
Seanta  Cleveland  MSAT  Adjunct Lecturer  
Joel  Coley  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Kimberly  Collins  M.A.  Lecturer  
Kathryn  Coney  MA  Lecturer  
Charles  Conyers  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Larry  Cook  MFA  Assistant Professor  
Aisha  Cort  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
John  Cotman  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Donta  Council  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Steven  Cummings  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Gerald  Daniels  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Christie  Dashiell Jalla  M.M.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Dennis  Davenport  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Wilfred  David  Ph.D.  Professor  
James  Davis  Ph.D.  Professor  
Josephine Jarpa  Dawuni  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Helen  De Clercq  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Roberto  De Leo  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Yasmin  Degout  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Marina  del Sol  Ph.D.  Master Instructor  
Agnes  Denalane  Ph.D.  Master Instructor  
Derayeh  Derakhshesh  Ph.D.  Professor  
Richard  Desinord  M.A.  Lecturer  
Pratibha  Dev  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Khady  Diene  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Angela  Dixon  Ph.D.  Professor  
David  Dixon  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Dominique  Douglas  MScA  Lecturer  
Moussa  Doumbia  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Michelle  Dovil  Ph.D.  Visiting Assistant Professor  
Uvetta  Dozier  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Melissa  Duchene-Kelly  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Atanu  Duttaroy  Ph.D.  Professor  
Oline  Eaton  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Jasmine  Edwards  MA  Adjunct Lecturer  
Valerie  Eichelberger  MM  Associate Professor  
Stanley  Einstein-Matthews  Ph.D.  Professor  
Patricia  Elam Walker  J.D. /MFA  Assistant Professor  
Broderick  Eribo  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Fnu  Eric Ngang Chen  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Gwendolyn  Everett  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Leo  Eyombo  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Stacy  Farina  Ph.D  Assistant Professor  
Michael  Fauntroy  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Raven  Featherstone  MFA  Associate Professor  
Michael  Fitzhugh  MA  Adjunct Lecturer  
Orrieann  Florius  MA  Lecturer  
Darrell  Fogan  MS  Adjunct Lecturer  
Curdella  Forbes  Ph.D.  Professor  
Joseph  Fortunak  Ph.D.  Professor  
Izolda  Fotiyeva  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Matthew  Franke  Ph.D.  Master Instructor  
Jack  Frankel  Ph.D.  Professor  
Ben  Fred-Mensah  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Douglas  Fuller  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Edilberto  Galvan  ME  Adjunct Lecturer  
Brien  Garnand  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Silvina  Gatica  Ph.D.  Professor  
Lucy  Gause  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Tafessework  Gebeyehu  MA  Adjunct Instructor  
Solomon  Gebru  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Jazmin  George  M.A.  Lecturer  
Angela  Geosits  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Stephen  Gibson  MM  Adjunct Lecturer  
Benita  Gladney  DMA  Assistant Professor  
Angela  Glymph  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Anthony  Gomes  MFA  Associate Professor  
Anaxidalia  Gonzalez Nunez  MA  Lecturer  
Patrick  Goodin  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Sherelle  Gordon  MBA  Lecturer  
Keneshia  Grant  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Kenyatta  Graves  MFA  Lecturer  
Gabrielle  Gray  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Rodney  Green  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
David  Green  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Barbara  Griffin  Ph.D.  Professor  
Jevay  Grooms  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Samaresh  Guchhait  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Yilma  Gultneh  Ph.D.  Professor  
Christopher  Gunderson  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Katharine  Gurski  Ph.D.  Professor  
Miriam  Gyimah  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Alem  Hailu  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Jacqueline  Hammond  M.A.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Cyrus  Hampton  MA  Master Instructor  
John  Harkless  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Caroline  Harper  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Jules  Harrell  Ph.D.  Professor  
Daryl  Harris  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Robin  Harris  BFA  Master Instructor  
Dinari  Harris  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
John  Harris  MA  Lecturer  
Denise  Hart  MFA  Professor  
Melanee  Harvey  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Alexander  Henke  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Carolivia  Herron  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Stephen  Hickson  MA  Lecturer  
Hope  Hill  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Ronil  Hira  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Brandon  Hogan  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Roberta  Hollander  Ph.D.  Professor  
William  Hollinsed  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Gregory  Hopkins  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Junior  Hopwood  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Charles  Hosten  Ph.D.  Professor  
Anton  House  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Lin-chi  Hsu  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Tristan  Hubsch  Ph.D  Professor  
Cyril  Hunte  Ph.D.  Professor  
Charles  Ichoku  Ph.D.  Professor  
JohnPatrick  Ifedi  Ph.D.  Master Instructor  
Johnson  Ige  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Fred  Irby  Ph.D  Professor  
Jocelyn  Isaac  MFA  Lecturer  
Allen  Jackson  MFA  Adjunct Lecturer  
Fatimah  Jackson  Ph.D.  Professor  
Eliseo  Jacob  Ph.D.  Master Instructor  
Jasmine  Jacobs  M.M.T.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Alexander  Jacobsen  BA  Adjunct Lecturer  
David  James  Ph.D  Associate Professor  
Krystal  Jenkins  MA  Lecturer  
Nicole  Jenkins  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Marie-Claude  Jipguep  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Deborah  Johnson  MS  Master Instructor  
Krista  Johnson  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Brittany  Johnson  MM  Lecturer  
Sarai  Johnson  MA  Lecturer  
Evelyn Alexandra Araba  Johnston-Arthur  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Clinton  Jones  J.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Delores  Jones-Brown  Ph.D.  Visiting Professor  
Veronica  Joyner  MA  Lecturer  
Sais  Kamalidiin  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Nkonko  Kamwangamalu  Ph.D.  Professor  
Ezer  Kang  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Yeona  Kang  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Per  Karlsson  MM  Assistant Professor  
Mika  Kato  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Natalia  Kazaryan  DMA  Adjunct Lecturer  
James  Keil  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Jeffrey  Kerr-Ritchie  Ph.D.  Professor  
Petronella  Kigochi  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Cheryl  Kiken  MA  Lecturer  
Sue  Kim  MA  Adjunct Lecturer  
Woojae  Kim  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Sung  Kim  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Eleanor  King  Ph.D.  Professor  
Dimiter  Kirilov  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Kelly  Knickmeier Cummings  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Assane  Konte  BA  Adjunct Lecturer  
Emily  Kugler  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Gerard  Kunkel  MM  Adjunct Lecturer  
Haydar  Kurban  Ph.D.  Professor  
Marty  Lamar  MFA  Lecturer  
Corey  Lamont  Ph.D.  Master Instructor  
Clarence  Lee  Ph.D.  Professor  
Molly  Levine  Ph.D.  Professor  
Kay  Lewis  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Ometha  Lewis-Jack  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
James  Lindesay  Ph.D.  Professor  
Michael  Lipscomb  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Esther  Lisanza  Ph.D.  Visiting Assistant Professor  
Ivor  Livingston  Ph.D.  Professor  
Aaron  Livingston  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Litonya  Livingston  MS  Adjunct Lecturer  
Aicha  Lompo  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Lancelot  Loncke  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Deneen  Long  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Walter  Lowe  Ph.D.  Professor  
Brunilda  Lugo De Fabritz  Ph.D.  Master Instructor  
Clarence  Lusane  Ph.D.  Professor  
Ayanna  Lynch  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Jean-Michael  Mabeko-Tali  Ph.D.  Professor  
Timothy  Macek  MM  Adjunct Lecturer  
Kyr  Mack  MA  Lecturer  
Mohammad  Mahmood  Ph.D.  Professor  
Crepin  Mahop  Ph.D.  Master Instructor  
Sidi  Maiga  Ph.D  Lecturer  
Monique  Major  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Amir  Maleki  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
GiShawn  Mance  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Ronnie  Manuel  Ph.D.  Professor  
Jason  Matthews  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Henok  Mawi  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Wendy  McBurney  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Jo Von  McCalester  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Donna  McCormick  MPA  Adjunct Lecturer  
Jill  Mcgowan  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Mary  McKenna  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Alexander  McSwain  MFA  Assistant Professor  
Tony  Medina  Ph.D.  Professor  
Edna  Medford  Ph.D.  Professor  
Gaminie  Meepagala  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Arti  Mehta  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
George  Middendorf  Ph.D.  Professor  
Keesha  Middlemass  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Connaitre  Miller  MM  Associate Professor  
Prabhakar  Misra  Ph.D.  Professor  
Phiwokuhle  Mnyandu  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Kevin  Modestino  Ph.D.  Master Instructor  
Ahmed  Mohamed  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Amelia  Mondragon  Ph.D.  Professor  
Shaunte  Montgomery  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Claudia  Mouamba  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Raslan  Moutraji  MA  Master Instructor  
Leonard  Muaka  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Bahiyyah  Muhammad  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Louise  Mundstock  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Denee  Mwendwa  Ph.D.  Professor  
Timothy  Myers  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Joshua  Myers  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Dawn  Naser  Ph.D  Adjunct Lecturer  
Cheikh  Ndiaye  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Samuel  Ndubuisi  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Meenakshi  Nerolu  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Elizabeth  Newman  MA  Lecturer  
Paule Mireille  Ngo Mbai  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Nikongo  Nikongo  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Patricia  Noone  MA  Master Instructor  
Alex  Nowak  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Shana  O'Connell  Ph.D.  Master Instructor  
Elisa  Oh  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Chinyerem  Ohia  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Joel  Ojelade  MA  Adjunct Lecturer  
Isaiah  Okiemen  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Sean  O'Loughlin  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Adebayo  Oluwayomi  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Remi  Ombolo  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Bayo  Omolola  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Drew  Owen  MM  Adjunct Lecturer  
William  Page  MFA  Lecturer  
Patrick  Parks  M.Ed.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Assya  Pascalev  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Arvilla  Payne-Jackson  Ph.D.  Professor  
Sean  Pears  M.F.A.  Lecturer  
Paul  Peart  Ph.D.  Professor  
Trevon  Pegram  MA  Lecturer  
Donte  Pennington  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Mary  Perkins  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Jason  Perry  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Ravi  Perry  Ph.D.  Professor  
James  Phillips  MFA  Associate Professor  
Anita  Plummer  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Patrick  Plummer  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Reginald  Pointer  MFA  Associate Professor  
Mildred  Pointer  Ph.D.  Professor  
Eric  Poole  D.M.A.  Assistant Professor  
Katherine  Pope  M.A.  Lecturer  
Yvonne  Poser  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Anika  Prather  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Dominique  Pritchett  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Ernest  Quimby  Ph.D.  Professor  
Tiffany  Quinn  BFA  Adjunct Lecturer  
Dharmaraj  Raghavan  Ph.D.  Professor  
Timothy  Ramadhar  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Francois  Ramaroson  Ph.D.  Professor  
Ricky  Ramon  ME  Lecturer  
Anthony  Randolph  DMA  Associate Professor  
Da'Shown  Rawl  B.F.A.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Sheshalatha  Reddy  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
David  Reed  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Iliana  Restrepo  Ph.D.  Master Instructor  
Rebecca L  Reviere  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
William  Richards  MM  Adjunct Lecturer  
Debra  Roberts  Ph.D.  Professor  
Ashley  Robertson- Preston  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Courtney  Robinson  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Leroy  Rowe  MS  Master Instructor  
Guericke  Royal  MM  Associate Professor  
Eric  Ruffin  MFA  Associate Professor  
Prem Raj  Ruffin  MS  Lecturer  
Lifoma  Salaam  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Rachel  Salgado  MA  Lecturer  
Norman  Sandridge  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Daryl  Scott  Ph.D.  Professor  
Thomas  Searles  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Nicholas  Seifert  MFA  Master Instructor  
Richard  Seltzer  Ph.D.  Professor  
Marie-Line  Sephocle  Ph.D.  Professor  
Feraidoon  Shams  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Tanya  Shanklin  MA  Adjunct Lecturer  
Christopher  Shinn  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Marcus  Singer  Ph.D.  Professor  
Judith  Singletary  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Lawrencia Konje  Siri Epse Nukenine  PhD  Lecturer  
Sankar  Sitaraman  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Lloyd  Sloan  Ph.D.  Professor  
Norma  Small-Warren  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Sidrea  Smith  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Andria  Smythe  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Dominicus  So  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
William  Spriggs  Ph.D.  Professor  
Amanda  Stack  M.F.A.  Lecturer  
Caroline  Stark  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Christopher  Steele  M.M.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Elka  Stevens  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Jay  Stewart  J.D.  Lecturer  
Omari  Swinton  Ph.D.  Professor  
Demba  Sy  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Vladimir  Talanov  Ph.D.  Master Instructor  
Galina  Talanova  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Jean-Jacques  Taty  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Michelle  Taylor  MFA  Master Instructor  
Nikki  Taylor  Ph.D.  Professor  
Darlene  Taylor  MFA  Lecturer  
Shaolei  Teng  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Mickey  Terry  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Maimouna  Thiam  MBM  Lecturer  
Patricia  Thomas    Adjunct Lecturer  
Michael  Thomas  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Albert  Thompson  M.A.  Lecturer  
Mercedes  Tibbits  Ph.D.  Professor  
Emory  Tolbert  Ph.D.  Professor  
Bourama  Toni  Ph.D.  Professor  
Erin  Torbett  MA  Lecturer  
Alla  Tovares  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Alexander  Tulin  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Hemayet  Ullah  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Liana  Valente  D.M.A.  Assistant Professor  
Verny  Varela  MA  Adjunct Lecturer  
Charles  Verharen  Ph.D.  Professor  
Catalina  Villar  MPhil  Lecturer  
Jarrod  Waetjen  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Karen  Wallace  Ph.D.  Professor  
Mesi  Walton  MA  Adjunct Lecturer  
Karen  Walwyn  DMA  Associate Professor  
Xingting  Wang  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Kelvin  Washington  M.ME  Lecturer  
Andrea  Washington-Brown  MFA  Lecturer  
Valethia  Watkins  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Rachel  Watson  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Mengsteab  Weldegaber  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Kenny  Wesley  MA  Lecturer  
Quinton  Williams  Ph.D.  Professor  
Clarissa  Williams  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Daniel  Williams  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Lanice  Williams  MS  Adjunct Lecturer  
Marlon  Williams  Ph.D  Adjunct Lecturer  
Jennifer  Williams  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Yolonda  Wilson  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Cynthia  Winston  Ph.D.  Professor  
Daria  Winter  MA  Master Instructor  
Robinson  Woodward-Burns  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Tia  Wortham  MM  Adjunct Lecturer  
Tingting  Xiong  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Abdul-Aziz  Yakubu  Ph.D.  Professor  
Etsuko  Yamakita  MA  Master Instructor  
Lennox  Yearwood  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Amy  Yeboah  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Charlie  Young  MM  Professor  
Andrea  Young  M.A.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Christine  Young  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Yan-Liang  Yu  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Royce  Zackery  MA  Associate Professor  
Almaz  Zewde  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
School of Business  
Kamal  Agarwal  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Anthony  Anderson  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Rafique  Anderson  J.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Karthik  Balasubramanian  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
William  Barbee  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
William  Brent  D.B.A.  Professor  
Stacye  Brown Loman  MBA  Adjunct Instructor  
Allison  Bryant  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Carlos  Buskey  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Curtis  Cain  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Byeongyong  Choi  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Charmaine  Davis  MBA  Adjunct Instructor  
Ratna  Dey  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Crystal  Dobratz  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Denver  D'Rozario  Ph.D.  Professor  
Maru  Etta-Nkwelle  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Yuvay  Ferguson  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Rajni  Goel  Ph.D.  Professor  
Wen  Gong  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Johnny  Graham  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Alton  Henley  MBA  Adjunct Lecturer  
Amanda  Hinojosa  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
James  Hodge  MBA  Adjunct Lecturer  
Rayshad  Holmes  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Cathy  House  MBA  Adjunct Lecturer  
L. Jide  Iwarere  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Jin-Gil  Jeong  Ph.D.  Professor  
Angela  Jones  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Masoud  Kavoossi  Ph.D.  Professor  
Lynne  Kelly  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Curtis  Kidd  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Christopher  King  M.B.A.  Adjunct Instructor  
Subodh  Kulkarni  Ph.D.  Professor  
Anupam  Kumar  Ph.D.  Professor  
Stephanie  Leonard  PHD  Assistant Professor  
Lucy  Lim  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Debby  Lindsey-Taliefero  Ph.D.  Professor  
Adrian  Mayse  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Sandip  Mukherji  Ph.D.  Professor  
Jonathan  Newton  J.D.  Adjunct Instructor  
Efua  Obeng  Ph.D.  Professor  
Michael  Ogbolu  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Ephraim  Okoro  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Daniel  Owunwanne  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Philemon  Oyewole  Ph.D.  Professor  
Samuel  Paschall  JD  Associate Professor  
Russell  Price  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Mohammad  Quasem  Ph.D.  Professor  
Sia  Rose-Robinson  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Narendra  Rustagi  Ph.D.  Professor  
Anita  Schmied  MIM  Instructor  
James  Shelton  M.B.A.  Adjunct Instructor  
Raymond  Smith  Ph.D.  Professor  
Denise  Streeter  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Darian  Unger  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Melvin  Washington  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Jean  Wells  J.D.  Associate Professor  
Dana  Williams-Johnson  Ph.D.  Instructor  
School of Communications  
Quazi  Ahmed  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Mark  Beckford  MSc  Assistant Professor  
Keena  Blackmon  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Melissa  Bradley  M.B.A.  Professor  
Carolyn  Byerly  Ph.D.  Professor  
Shirley  Carswell  MS  Lecturer  
Roger  Caruth  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Jae Eun  Chung  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Loren  Coleman  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Emily  Cramer  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Alaina  Davis  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Nicole  Dillard  J.D.  Assistant Professor  
Idit  Dvir  MFA  Associate Professor  
Hazel  Edney  Masters  Adjunct Lecturer  
Ziad  Foty  M.F.A.  Lecturer  
Fritz  Gerald  B.Arch  Adjunct Lecturer  
Heidi  Gerber-Salins  MA  Assistant Professor  
Tamika  Gittens  M.A.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Maha  Haddad  Masters  Lecturer  
Ovetta  Harris  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Natalie  Hopkinson  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Sheryl  Johnson-Ross  Master  Associate Professor  
Joseph  Kim  Ph.D  Adjunct Lecturer  
Charrose  King  Ph.D.  Lecturer  
Jean Claude  Kwitonda  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Yanick  Lamb  MBA  Professor  
Kehbuma  Langmia  Ph.D.  Professor  
Jay  Lucker  Ed.D.  Professor  
Carolyn  Malachi  MFA  Assistant Professor  
Cheriss  May  BA  Adjunct Lecturer  
Silvia  Martinez  Ed.D.  Professor  
Christine  McWhorter  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Angela  Minor  J.D.  Associate Professor  
Montre  Missouri  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Cynthia  Morton  MFA  Associate Professor  
Srikanth  Nandigama  MFA  Assistant Professor  
Uchenna  Onuzulike  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Chukwuka  Onwumechili  Ph.D.  Professor  
Donna  Oti  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Vasilios  Papaioannu  M.F.A.  Assistant Professor  
Yong Jin  Park  Ph.D.  Professor  
Stacey  Patton  PHD  Assistant Professor  
Valencia  Perry  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Monica  Ponder  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Samantha  Powers  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Jami  Ramberan  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Sidney  Ribeau  Ph.D.  Professor  
Tommie  Robinson  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Vickey  Saunders  MFA  Associate Professor  
Cherri  Sinclair  M.A.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Shameka  Stanford  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Ingrid  Sturgis  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Wei  Sun  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Lauren  Sweet  M.S.  Clinical Educator  
Jennifer  Thomas  MA  Associate Professor  
Taylor  Turner  MA  Adjunct Lecturer  
Tia  Tyree  Ph.D.  Professor  
Millard  Watkins  Certificate  Adjunct  
Jennifer  Williams  M.S.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Sonja  Williams  M.A.  Professor  
Richard  Wright  Ph.D.  Professor  
Wilhelmina  Wright-Harp  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
School of Education  
Shareefah  Al Uqdah  PhD  Associate Professor  
Kenneth  Anderson  PhD  Professor  
Alpheus  Arrington Jr.  EdD  Adjunct Lecturer  
Joy  Banks  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Helen  Bond  PhD  Associate Professor  
Jean-Paul  Cadet  Ed.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Gizelle  Carr  PhD  Assistant Professor  
Melanie  Carter  PhD  Associate Professor  
Scott  Dantley  Ph.D.  Professor  
Mercedes  Ebanks  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Salman  Elbedour  PhD  Professor  
Leslie  Fenwick  PHD  Professor  
Angela  Ferguson  PhD  Associate Professor  
Kimberley  Freeman  PhD  Professor  
Renee  Garraway  Ed.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Lisa  Grillo  EdD  Assistant Professor  
Rodney  Henderson  EdD  Adjunct Lecturer  
James  Jackson  PhD  Associate Professor  
Denisha  Jones  PhD  Adjunct Lecturer  
Sosanya  Jones  Ed.D.  Assistant Professor  
Shawn  Joseph  Ed.D.  Assistant Professor  
Ocheze  Joseph  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Deena  Khalil  PhD  Associate Professor  
Velma  LaPoint  PhD  Professor  
Celeste  Malone  PhD  Associate Professor  
Kia  McDaniel  Ed.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Kyndra  Middleton  PhD  Associate Professor  
Ura  Oyemade Bailey  PhD  Professor  
Robert  Palmer  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Katherine  Picho  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Catherine  Quinlan  Ed.D.  Assistant Professor  
Hakim  Rashid  PhD  Professor  
Gregory  Reed  PhD  Associate Professor  
Elizabeth  Ricks  PhD  Assistant Professor  
Jamie  Riley  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Jennifer  Rious  Ph.D.  Visiting Assistant Professor  
Cristobal  Rodriguez  PhD  Associate Professor  
Duane  Ross  Ed.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Gerald  Shockley  PhD  Professor  
Veronica  Thomas  PhD  Professor  
Ivory  Toldson  PhD  Professor  
Gail  Upchurch Mills  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Kamilah  Woodson  Ph.D.  Professor  
College of Engineering & Architecture  
Michaela  Amoo  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Stephen  Arhin  D.Sc.  Associate Professor  
Saurav  Aryal  M.S.  Lecturer  
Hyung  Bae  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Jeremy  Blackstone  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Peter  Bofah  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Bobby  Boone  M.C.P.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Legand  Burge  Ph.D.  Professor  
Preethi  Chandran  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Ramesh  Chawla  Ph.D.  Professor  
Sheldon  Clark  BA/BS  Adjunct Lecturer  
Kristina  Crenshaw  M.Arch.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Toriano  Davis  D.D.S.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Jeseth  Delgado Vela  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Edward  Dunson  M.Arch.  Associate Professor  
Leland  Edgecombe  Ph.D  Adjunct Lecturer  
Hazel  Edwards  Ph.D.  Professor  
Robert  Efimba  Sc.D.  Associate Professor  
Sola  Famakin  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Torrance  Fennell  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Farhana  Ferdous  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Lorraine  Fleming  Ph.D.  Professor  
Moses  Garuba  Ph.D.  Professor  
Tepper  Gill  Ph.D.  Professor  
Emmanuel  Glakpe  Ph.D.  Professor  
Bradford  Grant  M.Arch.  Professor  
Kevin  Greenaugh  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Desmond  Grimball  B.Arch  Adjunct Lecturer  
Curry  Hackett  BA/BS  Adjunct Lecturer  
Md Sami  Hasnine  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Noha  Hazzazi  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Reginald  Hobbs  Ph.D.  Adjunct Assistant Professor  
Kimberly  Jones  Ph.D.  Professor  
Harry  Keeling  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Peter  Keiller  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Charles  Kim  Ph.D.  Professor  
Fadel  Lashhab  PHD  Assistant Professor  
Jiang  Li  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Chunmei  Liu  Ph.D.  Professor  
Olumide  Malomo  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Nea  Maloo  M.Arch.  Assistant Professor  
Claudia  Marin  Ph.D.  Professor  
Ronnie  Mcghee  B. Arch.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Achille  Messac  Ph.D.  Professor  
James  Mitchell  Ph.D.  Professor  
James  Momoh  Ph.D.  Professor  
Mohsen  Mosleh  Ph.D.  Professor  
Dahlia  Nduom  M.Arch.  Assistant Professor  
Linwei  Niu  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Michael  O'Connor  M.Scs.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Gbadebo  Owolabi  Ph.D.  Professor  
Martin  Paddack  M.Arch.; M.Scs.  Assistant Professor  
Danda  Rawat  Ph.D.  Professor  
Timothy (Prescott)  Reavis  M.U.P.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Ahmed  Rubaai  Ph.D.  Professor  
Hassan  Salmani  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Paul  Schipper  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Ahlam  Shalaby  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Todd  Shurn  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Sonya  Smith  Ph.D.  Professor  
Solmaz  Tabtabaei  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
William  Taylor  M.Arch.  Associate Professor  
John  Tharakan  Ph.D.  Professor  
Naren  Vira  Ph.D.  Professor  
Mamadou  Wade  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Thomas  Wallen  J.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Grant  Warner  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Gloria  Washington  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Tao  Wei  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
H  Whitworth  D.Sc.  Professor  
Bernard  Woolfolk  M.S.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Su  Yan  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Hessam  Yazdani  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Nadir  Yilmaz  Ph.D.  Professor  
Patrick  Ymele-Leki  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
College of Nursing & Allied Health Sciences  
Oluwakemi  Adeola  Ph.D.  Clinical Assistant Professor  
Jessica  Alden  OTD  Assistant Professor  
Sylvia  Anderson  DHEd  Clinical Assitant Professor  
Njwen  Anyangwe  Ph.D.  Adjunct Assistant Professor  
Felecia  Banks  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Ghislaine  Barry  DNP  Adjunct Clinical Instructor  
Rhonda  Baxter  M.S.N.  Adjunct Clinical Instructor  
Rosett  Beck  MSN  Clinical Instructor (9-M)  
Fikru  Bedada  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Konah  Bernard  MS  Adjunct Clinical Assistant Professor  
Lisa  Brace  MASTER  Clinical Instructor  
Jutta  Brettschneider  MS  Adjunct Clinical Instructor  
Pamela  Brown-White  DPT  Clinical Assistant Professor  
Carole  Burnett  DSc  Associate Professor  
Lloyd  Campbell  B.S.  Adjunct Instructor  
Chimene  Castor  Ed.D.  Associate Professor  
Elisha  Chambers  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
Youssef  Charara  Ph.D.  Adjunct Assistant Professor  
Frederick  Covington  OTD  Adjunct Clinical Assistant Professor  
Carlton  Crockett  Ph.D.  Adjunct Lecturer  
KyRone  Davis  Ed.D.  Assistant Professor  
Nkechi  Enwerem  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Bernardine  Evans  DPT  Clinical Assistant Professor  
Tamerill  Faison  MS  Adjunct Clinical Instructor  
Kala  Flagg  MPT  Clinical Assistant Professor  
Rhonda  Fowler  DPT  Adjunct Instructor  
Marquise  Frazier  M.B.A.  Clinical Assistant Professor  
Thomas  Fungwe  Ph.D.  Professor  
Frank  Gainer  MS  Adjunct Clinical Assistant Professor  
Avis  Graham  Ph.D.  Adjunct Instructor  
Lennox  Graham  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Revenda  Greene  PhD  Associate Professor  
Suzy  Guerrier-Adams  MSN  Clinical Instructor  
Carolyn  Harris  J.D.  Adjunct Clinical Instructor  
Aunamesha  Henley  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Theresa  Hollaway  Psy.D.  Adjunct Instructor  
Charmaine  Hutchinson  MSN  Professor  
Oral  John  JD  Adjunct Clinical Assistant Professor  
Allan  Johnson  Phd  Professor  
Arlene  Johnson  Ph.D.  Adjunct Assistant Professor  
Gloria  Jones  DNP  Adjunct Assistant Professor  
Spiridon  Karavatas  PhD  Associate Professor  
Iwona  Kasior  PhD  Associate Professor  
Thierry  Lienou  MSOT  Clinical Instructor  
Karen  Ljunggren  M.S.  Clinical Instructor (9-M)  
Katherine  Manuel  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Sheeba  Nadarajah  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Marguerite  Neita  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Gilaine  Nettles  Ph.D.  Clinical Assistant Professor  
Oyonumo  Ntekim  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Priscilla  Okunji  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Yasmin  Omar  DPT  Adjunct Instructor  
Rodney  Perkins  MSN  Adjunct Clinical Instructor  
Carol  Porter  PhD  Assistant Professor  
Marchelle  Putney  OTD  Clinical Instructor (9-M)  
Lynda  Reha  DPT  Adjunct Assistant Professor  
Bentley  Reid  MBA, MT (ASCP)  Clinical Instructor  
Mary  Richardson  MSN  Adjunct Clinical Instructor  
Michael  Robinson  DPT  Adjunct Lecturer  
Phyllis  Ross  OTD  Clinical Assitant Professor  
Mary  Shahady  MSN  Clinical Instructor  
Tiffany  Simmons  MS  Clinical Instructor  
Kimberly  Smith  MSN  Clinical Instructor (9-M)  
Ellen  Spratley-Edwards  MSN  Clinical Instructor  
Caron  Strong  DNP  Assistant Professor  
Patricia  Talbert  Ph.D.  Associate Professor  
Linda  Thompson  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Gezahegn Gorfu  Tolla  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  
Ashley  Turner  DNP  Assistant Professor  
Arlene  Venable  MSN  Clinical Instructor  
Melissa  Weir  MSN  Clinical Instructor  
Joylynne  Wills  MGA  Clinical Instructor (9-M)  
Devora  Winkfield  Ph.D.  Assistant Professor  

 

Undergraduate Admissions 
General Admissions Requirements 
The University promotes academic excellence through a highly selective admission process. Students who are admitted show strong personal motivation along with backgrounds of consistent academic growth and achievement. The University encourages the submission of applications from socially and economically disadvantaged students who show promise of gaining from a Howard University education. To protect its character and standards of scholarship, the University reserves the right, and the applicant concedes to the University the right, to deny admission to any student at any time for any reason the University deems sufficient. 
On September 24, 1983, the Board of Trustees of Howard University adopted the following policy statement regarding applicants for admission: 
"Applicants seeking admission to Howard University are required to submit accurate and complete credentials and accurate and complete information requested by the University. Applicants who fail to do so shall be denied admission. Enrolled students, who as applicants failed to submit accurate and complete credentials or accurate and complete information on their application for admission shall be subject to dismissal when the same is made known regardless of classification." 
Application Options 
All students must use the Common Application to apply for admissions to the university. If a student needs assistance or accommodations, then the Office of the Registrar will provide a paper copy for that student. Students should refer to the Admission Policy and Admission Process sections on the university website. 
Howard University requires all admitted students to present proof of high school graduation before enrolling at HU. Admitted students must provide the Office of Undergraduate Admissions with such proof of graduation byAugust 1 of the year they plan to enroll. 
International Students: 
An extension will be granted to students outside the United States whose secondary schools operate on a different schedule. You will not be penalized for the late receipt of your graduation certificate or final report from your high school. Students who are submitting final exam results as proof of graduation should ensure that these results are sent to us as soon as they have been released, and provide official certificates as soon as these are available. Please note that if documents are not in English, an English translation should be provided, one which is issued either by a school official or by a translation agency accredited in the educational institution's country. 
In all cases, proof of graduation must be provided prior to beginning the first semester of classes at Howard. Howard considers the following documents to serve as proof of secondary school graduation: 
• 
A high school transcript submitted directly from the student’s school. We will not accept a high school transcript submitted by the student. The high school transcript must show the date of graduation. For students in a curriculum where national examinations or other certification signifies completion of high school those documents will be required as proof of graduation. 

• 
Results from the General Education Development (GED) Test. Students may submit GED results in lieu of a final high school transcript. Students can take the GED Test almost anywhere in the United States and Canada and internationally at any of the 3,400 Official GED Testing Centers. More information about obtaining a GED. 

• 
Admitted homeschooled students must either be able to provide evidence of a homeschool diploma, a certificate of completion that is considered the equivalent of a high school diploma in the applicant's home state, or they must complete and submit results of their GED test prior to enrollment at Howard. 

• 
A high school diploma showing the date of graduation, including the official seal and signature of the school’s governing officials. 


Final transcripts may be submitted by a school official through the Common Application, Naviance or fax. 
All mailed transcripts and other proof of graduation documents, however, should bear an official stamp, be signed and mailed from a student's school in a sealed envelope. 

Application Deadlines & Early Action 
Domestic applicants should apply by the following deadlines 
Domestic Applicants should apply by the following dates:    
Fall Semester: November 1st - Early Action: complete application files will be notified late- December 
 Spring Semester: November 1st - complete application files will be notified by late- November 
 
February 15th: Traditional Action/Regular Decision: Complete application files will be notified by mid- April 
 Summer Sessions: April 1st NOTE: Application decisions will be rendered only to complete files Decisions can not be given over the phone. 
 
International Applications should apply by the following deadlines:    
Fall Semester: November 1st - Early Action February 15th - Traditional Action 
 Sping Semester: September 1st Summer Sessions: February 1st  

Code for Standardized 
Test Scores SAT & TOEFL: 5297 ACT: 0674 
 

Report of Medical History 
All students are required to submit a completed Report of Medical History, proof of immunity to vaccine-preventable diseases. All students entering the University for the first time and those returning after an absence of one or more semesters are required to submit a completed health examination (Entrance Medical Record). Students will not be allowed to register for classes if their enrollment and medical forms have not been returned by the announced deadline date. Failure to submit the forms on time may result in the student’s having to register during late registration and paying a $175 late registration fee. The University reserves the right to deny registration to any student or prospective student who, in the judgment of the officials of the University Health Service, is suffering from a condition of illness that would be inimical to the health of others. In such cases, the recommendation of the University Health Service is final. 

First Time Student Admission Requirements 
First Time in College (FTIC) Students FTICs are students who have never been admitted to a degree program at Howard University or any other post-secondary institution of higher education. 
FTIC Academic Eligibility 
We consider the applicant's secondary school academic record, standardized college entrance exams (SAT or ACT), leadership in school and community activities, unique talents and skills, and educational objectives. For admission consideration, an applicant should have a well-balanced college preparatory program. 
FTIC Admission Requirements Package. 
A complete application package includes the following materials: 
1. 
An online application is preferred with non-refundable US$45 application fee. Personal checks are not accepted. Application fees are not waived; 

2. 
One letter of recommendation from a guidance counselor, principal, head of school, or school official; 

3. 
One letter of recommendation from a teacher or professor; 

4. 
Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) or American College Test ( ACT) scores 1. 
To obtain SAT 1 test dates, visit www.collegeboard.com – school code 5297 

2. 
To obtain ACT test dates, visit www.act.org – school code 0674; 




5. 
High School transcript, official certified final secondary school records, or mark sheets including grades 9-12; 

6. 
Certified documentation of exit examination scores for example CXC, GCE, WAEC, BGCSE, or exit examination scores from your region or country - All course titles, and the marks earned in those courses, should be reflected: I 1. 
f your transcript, exit exam, leaving certificate, or grade scale system is in a foreign language, an official English translation by World Education Services (www.wes.org) is required. Request the International Credential Advantage Package (ICAP) (Transcript + Evaluation) Document-byDocument Report only. 

2. 
Statement of results, provisional notifications of results, and website print out of results will not be accepted. 




7. 
Admission essay- Howard University is interested in you as a person, as well as how you think and express your thoughts. Please submit a 500-word essay on a topic of your choice or "How can I contribute to the Legacy of Howard University”. 

8. 
An official TOEFL- Howard’s school code is 5297. Only official reports from ETS will be accepted. Scores from the Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) http://www.ets.org/toefl are required for applicants whose native language is not English. 1. 
Score of 550 on the paper-based test (PBT) 

2. 
Score of 79 on the internet-based test(iBT) 

3. 
In lieu of the TOEFL (if not offered in your country), applicants may submit results from IELTS (International English Language Testing System) with an overall score of a 6.5. 




9. 
Statement of Financial Resources Form; the “1st Year” column must be completed, using the “General Undergraduate” figures; it must be signed by you and your sponsor. If you are selfsponsored, you should sign on both lines. The form does not require a signature or stamp by a bank official. 1. 
Statement of Financial Resources Form http://www.howard.edu/enrollment/documents/admission/Statement%20of%20Financial%20Resources.pdf 




10. 
Sponsor’s letter stating the sponsor’s name, your name, relationship to the sponsor and the sponsor’s intent to be responsible for your expenses; if you are self-sponsored, you should submit a letter stating that you are sponsoring yourself 

11. 
Recent monthly bank statement; if the statement is in a foreign currency, the US dollar equivalence and conversion rate must be stated. The balance must match or exceed the total completed in the “1st Year” column on the Financial Resources Form; a letter written by a bank is not acceptable. 


Residential address in your country of origin; PO Box only or commercial addresses are not acceptable. 

Transfer Student Admission Requirements 
Transfer Students 
Applicants who have attended another post-secondary institution of higher education and who may seek admission to Howard University with advanced standing will be classified as transfer students. 
Transfer Student Academic Eligibility 
Admission criteria vary among Howard University's schools and colleges. Transfer applicants must meet the following minimum requirements for admission consideration: 
• 
15 transferrable credit hours (30 credit hours for the School of Business) from a regionally accredited post secondary institution 


Transfer Students Admission Requirements Package. 
Students who plan to enroll at Howard University must complete and submit the following credentials by the designated deadline stated above: 
• 
Application for Admission with a $45.00 non-refundable application fee 

• 
Official transcripts from all post-secondary institutions attended; 

• 
A letter of recommendation from a professor or an academic advisor; and 

• 
A completed Professor Recommendation Form. 


 

International First Time Student Admission Requirements 
International Students: First Time in College (FTIC). 
International students are advised to begin the admission process at least one year prior to the time they wish to enter the University. Additional time is usually essential for submission of required tests, academic documents, evaluations, and immigration-related matters. 
International Students Academic Eligibility 
The following documents are required for admission consideration: 
• 
An online application is preferred with non-refundable application fee. Personal checks are not accepted. Application fees are not waived. 

• 
A letter of recommendation from a guidance counselor, principal, head of school, or school official; 

• 
A letter of recommendation from a teacher or professor; and 

• 
Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) or American College Test ( ACT) scores . 
To obtain SAT 1 test dates, visit www.collegeboard.com – school code 5297 

. 
To obtain ACT test dates, visit www.act.org – school code 0674 




• 
High School transcript, official certified final secondary school records, or mark sheets including grades 9-12. 

• 
Certified documentation of exit examination scores for example CXC, GCE, WAEC, BGCSE, or exit examination scores from your region or country - All course titles, and the marks earned in those courses, should be reflected. 

• 
Additional requirements are listed below: 


English Translation of Application Documents 
If your transcript, exit exam, leaving certificate, or grade scale system is in a foreign language, an official English translation by World Education Services(www.wes.org) is required. Request the International Credential Advantage Package (ICAP) (Transcript + Evaluation) Document-by-Document Report only. Statement of results, provisional notifications of results, and website print out of results will not be accepted. 
Admissions essay. 
Howard University is interested in you as a person, as well as how you think and express your thoughts. Please submit a 500-word essay on a topic of your choice or "How can I contribute to the Legacy of Howard University”. 
An official TOEFL Report. Only official reports from ETS will be accepted. Scores from the Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) http://www.ets.org/toefl are required for applicants whose native language is not English. Howard’s school code is 5297. 
• 
550 on the paper-based test (PBT) 

• 
79 on the internet-based test(iBT) 


In lieu of the TOEFL (if not offered in your country), applicants may submit results from IELTS (International English Language Testing System) with an overall score of a 6.5. 
Statement of Financial Resources Form. 
The “1st Year” column must be completed, using the “General Undergraduate” figures; it must be signed by you and your sponsor. If you are selfsponsored, you should sign on both lines. The form does not require a signature or stamp by a bank official. 
Statement of Financial Resources 
Form. http://www.howard.edu/enrollment/documents/admission/Statement%20of%20Financial%20 Resources.pdf 
Sponsor’s Letter. 
The Sponsor’s letter must state the sponsor’s name, your name, relationship to the sponsor and the sponsor’s intent to be responsible for your expenses; if you are self-sponsored, you should submit a letter stating that you are sponsoring yourself 
Recent monthly bank statement. 
If the statement is in a foreign currency, the US dollar equivalence and conversion rate must be stated. The balance must match or exceed the total completed in the “1st Year” column on the Financial Resources Form; a letter written by a bank is not acceptable. Residential address in your country of origin; PO Box only or commercial addresses are not acceptable. 
Issuance of I-20 (Certificate of Eligibility). 
Immigration form I-20 (Certificate of Eligibility), needed to obtain a student visa, is not issued until the applicant has (1) been officially accepted by the University, (2) paid the enrollment fee, and (3) submitted a financial statement indicating how expenses will be met while attending the University. 
Regulations of the Immigration and Naturalization Service require that all people on F-1 (student) visas pursue a full course of study at all times. This means that undergraduates must be enrolled in no less than 12 credit hours at all times. For additional information contact the Office of International Student Services (http://www.howard.edu/internationalservices/default.htm) at (202) 806-4124. 
University Housing. 
International students who have been accepted at Howard University are not guaranteed housing. For additional information regarding housing, contact the Office of Residence Life at (202) 806-6131. 
Howard University is authorized under federal law to enroll non-resident students. 
 

International Transfer Student Admission Requirements 
International Students: Transfer 
A student who has completed academic studies at another college or university may be considered for transfer admission. 
International Transfer Students: Academic Eligibility. 
The minimum standards for admission consideration as a transfer student are: 
• 
A passing grade of C or better in both a college-level English and college-level math course 

• 
A minimum of 15 credits (30 credits for the School of Business) from an accredited postsecondary institution 

• 
2.5 cumulative grade point average (GPA) (3.0 GPA for the School of Business) 


The following documents are required for admission consideration: 
1. 
An on-line application is preferred with non-refundable US$45 application fee. Personal checks are not accepted. Application fees are not waived. 

2. 
One letter of recommendation from a teacher or professor. 

3. 
Official transcripts from all post-secondary institutions. If your transcript is in a foreign language or grade scale system, an official English translation is required by the World Education Services(www.wes.org) requesting the International Credential Advantage Package (ICAP) (Transcript + Evaluation) Course-by-Course (with GPA & course levels) Report only. 

4. 
An official TOEFL- Howard’s school code is 5297. Only official reports from ETS will be accepted. Scores from the Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) are required for applicants whose native language is not English. Once the application is received, a member from EM/Admission will inform the student if he/she must take this test. 

5. 
In lieu of the TOEFL (if not offered in your country), applicants may submit results from IELTS (International English Language Testing System) with an overall score of a 6.5. 

6. 
Statement of Financial Resources Form; the first column must be completed, using the figures shown for your student status. It must be signed by you and your sponsor. If you are selfsponsored, you should sign on both lines. The form does not require a signature or stamp by a bank official. 


Statement of Financial Resources (PDF) 
1. 
Sponsor’s letter stating the sponsor’s name, your name, relationship to the sponsor and the sponsor’s intent to be responsible for your expenses; if you are self-sponsored, you should submit a letter stating that you are sponsoring yourself. 

2. 
Recent monthly bank statement; if the statement is in a foreign currency, the US dollar equivalence and conversion rate must be stated. The balance must match or exceed the total completed in the right column on the Financial Resources Form; a letter written by a bank is not acceptable. 

3. 
Residential address in your country of origin; PO Box only or commercial addresses are not acceptable. 

4. 
International Students transferring from a college/university within the United States must also send: 

5. 
Copy of your I-94 and current I-20. 

6. 
Color copy of your passport photo page and visa page. 

7. 
Transfer Form completed by the immigration advisor at your current school 


Mail all required documents to: Howard University Office of Admission 2400 Sixth Street NW, Suite 111 Washington, DC 20059 
Immigration form I-20 (Certificate of Eligibility), needed to obtain a student visa, is not issued until the applicant has (1) been officially accepted by the University, (2) paid the enrollment fee, and (3) submitted a financial statement indicating how expenses will be met while attending the University. 
Regulations of the Immigration and Naturalization Service require that all people on F-1 (student) visas pursue a full course of study at all times. This means that undergraduates must be enrolled in no less than 12 credit hours at all times. For additional information contact the Office of International Student Services at (202) 806-4124. 
International students who have been accepted at Howard University are not guaranteed housing. 
For additional information regarding housing, contact the Office of Residence Life at (202) 806-6131. 

Other Categories Seeking Undergraduate Admission: 
Former Students Returning (FSR) 
Students who are not enrolled during the current semester (summer session not included), but who have previously attended Howard University are classified as Former Students Returning (FSR). 
FSRs must submit an application following the appropriate application deadlines. An application fee and enrollment fee are not required. FSRs absent from the University for two or more years must also obtain a medical clearance from the University Student Health Center before they can complete the registration process. 
Students who cease to attend the University for one semester or more, whether or not voluntarily, are subject to all regulations and requirements in force at the time they resume their studies, unless other arrangements have been agreed to by the dean and recorded in writing before their absence. 
In general, FSRs are readmitted to the last school in which they were enrolled at Howard University. Applicants must submit an official transcript from each post-secondary institution attended since last enrolled at Howard to the Office of Admission. Credit will be awarded for those courses taken that are comparable to courses offered at Howard University in which the student has earned a grade of C or better. 
Before readmission is granted, students who are absent from the University for the following reasons must fulfill the corresponding requirements. 
Withdrawn for health reasons- Clearance from the University Student Health Center must be obtained, such correspondence should be directed to the Administrator, University Student Health Center, 2139 Georgia Ave NW, 2nd Floor, Howard University, Washington, DC 20059. 
Academic Suspension-Students who are academically suspended must seek reinstatement through the college or school from which they were suspended. If reinstatement is granted by the school or college, students must then complete all readmission processes required by the Office of Admissions and the Registrar. In most instances, suspended students must be out of school for at least one semester to submit a reinstatement petition. Suspended students are encouraged to meet with their academic adviser to discuss the reinstatement petition process, deadlines, and eligibility requirements at least one semester prior to their desired readmission date. 
Disciplinary suspension and/or withdrawal -Readmission may be sought for any period following expiration of the suspension period. 
All voluntary withdrawals-Persons who withdraw voluntarily must follow readmission processes outlined by the Office of the Admissions. 
Once a student graduates, he/she may not return to the same school or status as an undergraduate, but must be considered either graduate/professional, unclassified, or seeking another undergraduate degree and must pay the applicable application fees. 

Unclassified Students 
Unclassified students are non-matriculating student who wish to complete courses during the spring or fall semester. Typically students who require completion of pre-requisite courses to begin a specific course of study are considered unclassified. 

Visiting Students 
Visiting students who plan to enroll at Howard University must complete and submit the following: 
• 
Application for Admission 

• 
Non-refundable $45 application fee, paid by money order, cashier's check, or credit card only. 

• 
At least a 2.50 GPA 

• 
Official transcript 


A letter of permission from the home school. The letter should include the student’s GPA and a list of courses the student is authorized to take. Applications will not be processed until such letter is received. 
Visiting students who are admitted to Howard University must pay a $300 non-refundable enrollment fee to secure their place in the class. Visiting students are considered for housing once they have been accepted and have submitted an application for housing and a $50 housing application fee (housing is not guaranteed). Visiting students can matriculate for a maximum of one academic year. 

Summer School 
Summer Student-At-Large 
A non-matriculating (non-degree) student who is applying to attend for the summer semester only. Summer students may not take Fall or Spring coursework. Students who would like to take Fall and Spring courses should submit an applicable application for admission for the appropriate semester. This application is also not intended for students who currently attend Howard University as part of a degree-seeking program (thus, you are generally eligible to register for summer classes where appropriate) or returning students who would like to apply for readmission for summer re-entry. Please note, institutional aid is not available for summer classes; however, federal aid may be applicable if eligible. 
Applicants must complete and submit the following: 
1. 
Application for Admission (Howard University Online Application). 

2. 
One official transcript from all post-secondary institutions attended. Official transcripts may be submitted via an e-Transcript system (to admission@howard.edu) if available (highly preferred). If your school does not have an e-Transcript system, please submit a copy of your transcript via mail (not preferred, as there may be significant delays in our receipt of mailed items). You may not submit your school transcript via email. 

3. 
Personal Statement detailing your reason for seeking summer admission. 


Mailing Address: 
Attn: Summer Student Admission 
2400 6th Street NW, Washington, DC 20059 

Consortium of Universities of the Washington Metropolitan Area (CUWMA) 
The CUWMA is a cooperative arrangement in post-secondary education that is designed to permit the sharing of academic resources by member institutions and to offer qualified students the opportunity to enroll at other institutions for courses not available on their own campus. 
Howard University offers its qualified undergraduates and graduates degree students the opportunity to enroll in courses at American University, Catholic University, Corcoran College, Gallaudet University, Georgetown University, George Mason University, George Washington University, Marymount University, Trinity University, University of the District of Columbia, and the University of MarylandCollege Park. 
REGISTRATION FOR THE CONSORTIUM PROGRAM IS COMPLETED AT HOWARD UNIVERSITY BY THE CONSORTIUM COORDINATOR IN THE OFFICE OF THE REGISTRAR. 
HOWARD UNIVERSITY STUDENTS DO NOT HAVE TO REGISTER AT THE VISITED INSTITUTION. 
Requirements: 
• 
Must be a fully admitted degree seeking student. 

• 
Must be and remain in good Academic and Financial Standing in order to apply for the Consortium Program. 

• 
Consortium credit hours cannot exceed the number of credits registered for at HU. Students who drop below the required credits at HU, your Consortium registration will be canceled no exceptions. 


Procedure: 
• 
Check class schedules of the Consortium Institutions at www.consortium.org 


***Availability of classes cannot be guaranteed. Courses may be closed or subject to approval from the dean/department at the visited institutions. If special permission is needed, Students must obtain written permission from the instructor and submit it with the Consortium Registration form. 
Please Note. 
Consortium Registration dates are determined by HU Registration dates. 
All Consortium Registration for Howard Students is completed by the HU Consortium Coordinator. Once registration is completed at HU, students may be required to present consortium registration form. 
Consortium courses will be added to students HU schedule. 
Consortium institutions do not register visiting Consortium students until the first week of class. 
The University of Maryland does not register visiting Consortium students until the first day of classes. 
Students must adhere to HU drop and withdrawal deadline. To drop or withdraw students must contact the Consortium Coordinator. 
All grades are submitted to the HU Coordinator and will be posted upon receipt. Grades may be delayed depending on the administrative processes of the home and visited institutions. 
Submitting a registration form is not confirmation of registration at the Host institutions. Students will receive a registration confirmation via email from the Host institution at the beginning of the semester. Any fee or extra expense attached to a course or tutoring service is not covered in the Consortium Agreement and must be paid by the student to the institution administering the course or service. 
Any Prospective Graduate interested in participating in the Consortium Program take note: HU semester usually ends earlier than most of the host institutions. Therefore, be advised that grades may not be submitted in time to meet HU graduation deadline. 
It is taken into consideration that some institutions’ semester may start later than HU. In these cases, the Drop deadline for Consortium only extends to the first day, and only the first day, of classes at the visited Consortium institution. This Extension does not apply to Howard University Classes. Students are required to inform the Consortium Coordinator the very next day of your intention to drop the class. Any decision to drop after the first day of classes at the host institution will result into a withdrawal (W for that class). 
If the course is canceled, please contact the Consortium Coordinator immediately. 
To drop or withdraw from a Consortium course, students must report immediately to the Consortium Coordinator and complete a withdrawal form. CONSORTIUM COURSES SHOULD NOT BE DROPPED ON BISONWEB. Consortium grades for Howard University students are received in the Office of the Registrar and automatically recorded on the student’s permanent academic record. 
Consortium information and materials are available in the Office of the Registrar located in the Administration Building-Suite 105. 

Placement Exams 
English (Freshman Composition) Placement 
All students are expected to complete their writing requirements within their first-year of attending Howard. 
Criteria #1) 
If you scored below 450 on the SATW or below 18 on the ACTE, you will be blocked registered for a ENGL 002 course with a writing skills lab. Once you complete the course with a C or better, then you will be allowed to progress to ENGL 003. Once you complete the course with a C or better, then you will have completed your first-year writing requirement. 
Criteria #2) 
If you scored between 450 – 509 on the SATW or between 25-18 on the ACTE, you will be block registered for a traditional EGNL 002 course. Once you complete the course with a C or better, then you will be allowed to progress to ENGL 003. Once you complete the course with a C or better, then you will have completed your first-year writing requirement. 
Criteria #3) 
If you scored a 510 or higher on the SATW or 26 or higher on the ACTE, you will be blocked registered for ENGL 004. Only those students who have been admitted into COAS Honors program will be registered for ENGL 075. Once you complete ENGL 004 or 075 with a C or better, then you will be allowed to progress to ENGL 005. Once you complete ENGL 005, you will have completed your firstyear writing requirement. 
Note: Students who have been invited to the COAS Honors Program and who have NOT met the requisite scores for 004 will be registered for 002. 
Mathematics Placement 
The Math Placement Examination (MPE) is administered through McGraw-Hill’s Assessment and Learning in Knowledge Spaces (ALEKS) program. ALEKS is a web-based, artificially intelligent assessment and learning system that quickly and accurately assesses a student’s level of mathematic proficiency. ALEKS provides the advantages of one-on-one instruction, 24/7, from virtually any webbased computer. Upon completion of the initial diagnostic assessment, a customized learning plan will be generated for each student. Students will be able to complete their learning plan prior to taking the mandatory on-campus Math Placement Exam during New Student Orientation. The MPE results will determine math course eligibility and placement. Academic Advisers will be available during New Student Orientation to answer questions regarding major/program requirements. 
Students meeting the following criteria are exempt from the Math Placement Exam: 
• 
Score of “3” on the Advanced Placement (AP) Calculus AB exam – eligible to enroll in Calculus I 

• 
Score of “4” or higher” on the Advanced Placement (AP) Calculus AB exam – will earn credit for Calculus I 

• 
Score of “3” on the Advanced Placement (AP) Calculus BC exam – will earn credit for Calculus I, eligible to enroll in Calculus II 

• 
Score of “4 or higher” on Advanced Placement (AP) Calculus BC exam – will earn credit for Calculus I and Calculus II 


World Language Placement 
The Language Placement Examination (LPE) is administered to students who intend to continue enrollment in a language for which they earned high school credit. 
The LPE is administered through AVANT’s Placement Assessment program. AVANT’s Placement Assessment is a web-based, artificially intelligent assessment and learning system that quickly and accurately assesses a student’s level of language proficiency in Arabic, Chinese (Traditional and simplified), Spanish, French, German, and Japanese. AVANT provides the advantages of grouping and placing students, 24/7, from any web-based computer. AVANT’s Placement Assessments are quick, convenient, and engage students with real-world content in Reading, Contextualized Grammar, Writing, and Speaking. 
The LPE must be taken prior to enrollment/registration, or no later than the first week of class. Exceptions can be made through Study Abroad, Transferred Credits, and/or further placement testing. All language courses must be taken in proper sequence (e.g. “Language” 001, “Language” 002, “Language” 003, “Language” 004). 
Exemptions from foreign language requirement will be made based on proctored placement examination taken on site at Howard University. 
The LPE results will determine language course eligibility and placement. Academic Advisers will be available during New Student Orientation to answer questions regarding program requirements. 
Students meeting the following criteria are exempt from the Language Placement Exam: 
• 
Score of “3” on the Advance Placement (AP) Target Language exam – exempt from Languages 001-004. 

• 
Score of “4” or “5” on the Advance Placement (AP) Target Language exam – Receive credit for Language 040. 

• 
Score of “5” on the Advance Placement (AP) Target Language exam – Receive credit for Language 040 & Language 050. 


The LPE results are valid for one academic year (two semesters). The Department of World Languages and Cultures has the right of final approval of the accuracy of placement. For additional information contact Prof. Mercedes Tibbits (mtibbits@howard.edu), Coordinator. 

Undergraduate Transfer Credit Policy 
Howard University accepts academic courses from regionally accredited colleges and universities as transfer credits. For new student entering Howard University, and upon receipt of the student’s official transcript (s), transfer credits will be evaluated by using the following criteria. 
• 
Transfer courses must be of comparable content, academic level, and scope to the curricular offerings at Howard University. 

• 
Credit hour (s) assignment to transfer courses will be semester credit hours. If the originating institution is other than the semester system, the appropriate conversion of credit hour (s) will take place by the Office of Enrollment Management. 

• 
Students must have earned a grade of “C” or higher in academic courses in order for the courses to be transferred to Howard University. 

• 
For transfer course credits that are discipline specific, the Office of Enrollment Management will request a review and assignment of the transfer credits by the specific discipline. 

• 
The maximum number of credit hours that can be transferred from a two-year community college is 60 semester credit hours; and, the maximum number of credit hours that can be transferred from a four-year college is 90 semester credit hours. (Note: Howard University requires that the last 30 credit hours for an undergraduate degree be taken at Howard University). 

• 
Credit hours are transferable to Howard University, not grades. Therefore, grades for academic courses transferred will not be included in the overall GPA of a student. 

• 
All transcripts from international institutions must be evaluated by World Educational Services (WES) 


Credit by Advanced Placement (AP) Examination: 
New students entering Howard University may receive course credit for academic courses completed in secondary schools under the Advanced Placement Program administered by the College Board. 
• 
AP score must be sent directly from the College Board to the Office of the Enrollment Management 

• 
AP credit hours are awarded by Howard University according to the chart (List the link for AP scores and credit hours awarded here). 

• 
In each subject for whom credit is sought, a minimum score of 3 is required. However, some departments may require a score of 4 or 5 to receive the transfer credit for an AP examination. 


Credit by International Baccalaureate (IB) Examination: 
Howard University will evaluate and award course credits for an IB examination score, based on the following criteria. 
• 
Submission of an IB certificate directly to the Office of Admissions 

• 
Score of 4 or better on IB exam will result in awarding credits for the first level of the course. 

• 
Score of 5, 6, or 7 –award first and second levels of the course (e.g. Biology Higher Level score of 5, 6, or 7 and receive credit for Biol 101 and 102. 


Credit by Caribbean Advanced Proficiency Examination: 
Howard University will award transfer credits as follows for scores ranging from 1-3 
• 
Unit 1 = 1 course in specified curriculum/discipline sequence 

• 
Unit 2 = w courses specified curriculum/discipline sequence 



Financial Information 
Enrollment Fee 
Admitted students who intend to enroll at Howard University pay a $300 non-refundable enrollment fee by May 1st to secure their place in the class. 
Housing Fee. Students are considered for housing once they have been accepted and have submitted an application for housing and a $50 housing fee. 

Cost of Attendance 
2021 – 2022 Undergraduate Cost of Attendance 
The cost of attendance (COA) is an average estimate of what it costs a typical undergraduate student to attend Howard University for one academic year. Your cost of attendance estimate doesn't only include tuition. It also takes basic living and commuting expenses into account. The actual amount you pay, and the amount it costs you for one academic year will always differ from the cost of attendance. 
A typical Howard University undergraduate student living on campus and taking a full load of classes might have the following cost of attendance for the 2021-2022 school year: 
    On-Campus  
Direct Costs Estimate:  Tuition  $28,450  
  Mandatory Fees  $466  
  Housing  $9,300  
  Meal Plan  $5,378  
  Subtotal  $43,594  
Indirect Costs Estimate:  Books & Supplies  $1,360  
  Transportation  $1,000  
  Personal Expenses  $2,160  
  Total  $48,114  
If a family opts to take out a loan, federal fees are associated with doing so.  Loan Fees - Stafford  $100  
  Direct Parent PLUS - Loan Fees  $1,056  
  Cost of Attendance  $49,270  

*Based on full-time enrollment per semester. The estimated cost per credit hour is $1,185.42. 
**Subject to change each academic year. 
2021-2022 Estimate Cost of Attendance Website - For additional information. 

Expenses & Financial Aid 
Office of the Bursar 
Processes Remission of Tuition and all financial aid awards, except private funds given directly to the student. Authorizes payment of University-administered financial aid awards to a student’s account (e.g. loans, scholarships, grants, remission of tuition, grants). The Office of the Bursar also processes credit balances (aka “refund checks”) as well as refund and tuition adjustments; handles “special billing,” (e.g., the official billing (or invoicing) of Embassies or other appropriate agencies or organizations responsible for paying the educational expenses of particular students). This office is responsible for entering late charges, institutional residential, parking and library fines, to the account of the student who incurs same. 
The Office of the Bursar processes promissory notes provided by the Office of Financial Aid for University Emergency loans. Initiates and Processes promissory notes for Direct Student Loans, Perkins Federal Loans, Health Professions —Medicine, Dentistry, Pharmacy, and Nursing loans, as well as long-term University loans. The office processes student deferment forms as well as repayment of University and Federal loans. 
Costs 
Educational costs depend on a student’s program of study, the number of hours enrolled and living expenses. Costs for full-time tuition and fees vary based on a student’s school/college and program. Students will not be allowed to receive financial aid in excess of their cost of attendance, regardless of the sources of funds. This includes, but is not limited to: federal, state, institutional, donor or external grants, gifts and scholarships. Current information about the University’s tuition and fees is available at http://www.howard.edu/studentfinancialservices/accounts/tutionandfee.htm. 

Payment Information 
Payment in Full 
All charges must be paid in full by the due date: Fall semester, July 1st and Spring semester, December 1st. Any outstanding balances will be assessed a $100 late payment fee each month the balance remains and any other applicable late fees 
Installment Plan 
Howard University offers several payment options for students and their families for the fall and spring semesters. Summer sessions must be paid in full at the time of registration. There are no payment plans or alternate payment options available for summer enrollment. Students and their families are provided with payment plan options each year which is subject to change. These payment options are generally provided via an online service who will accept most forms of debit/credit cards, wires, and electronic checks. 
Payment Methods 
Payments may be made by credit card (Visa, American Express, MasterCard, Discover), cash, money order, cashier's check, certified check or wire transfer. A $35.00 fee will be charged for all reversed credit card payments and returned checks. Subsequent checks will not be accepted. Checks and money orders should include the student's name and Howard University Identification Number. 
Financial Aid 
Financial aid assists with offsetting educational expenses. The federal and state governments, as well as post-secondary schools, are public sources of aid, while civic groups, clubs, and religious organizations serve as private sources of aid. Financial aid is classified into three basic types: 1) grants and scholarships are ‘gift aid’ which are funds awarded that are not required to be repaid; employment is work, either on or off campus that you find through campus student employment services or on your own initiative; and a loan is monies borrowed from the federal or state government, the University or an alternative lender that must be repaid, including interest. Financial aid is distributed according to a variety of eligibility criteria within three categories: need-based aid and non-need-based aid and talent-based aid. Students are awarded need-based aid to assist in the difference between the total cost to attend the University full time and the amount of their family’s contribution as determined by the federal government. Non-need based aid may be used to replace the family contribution if a student meets the necessary eligibility criteria, which may vary depending on the program and is generally based on merit (e.g. GPA). Talent-based aid is usually awarded via University-sponsored programs. 
Financial aid is awarded based on financial need. At Howard University, more than half of all students receive some form of financial aid. The total amount of financial aid (need and non-need based) awarded to a student cannot exceed his or her total educational costs. Individual program requirements vary and funds are limited, therefore a student’s total financial need may not always be met. 
Most programs require that a student: 
1. 
Is a U.S. citizen or eligible non-citizen and have a valid social security number. (Individuals in the U.S. on F1, F2, J1, and J2 visas are ineligible). 

2. 
Be enrolled at least half-time in an eligible degree or certificate program. 

3. 
Demonstrates financial need as determined by review of the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). 

4. 
Not be indebted to any institution for repayment of any federal grant (Pell or SEOG) or in default on any federal loan (Perkins or Direct Loan). 

5. 
Male students born after December 31, 1959 who are at least 18 years old are required to register with the Selective Service System. 

6. 
Comply with the federal verification process, if necessary. 


Amount of Financial Aid Awards 
The cost of attendance budget includes average amounts for all expenses to attend Howard University. These figures are based on the average living expenses in the Washington D.C. metropolitan area. Although many factors help to determine the amount a student receives, the financial aid award is based primarily on the student’s demonstrated financial need. A student’s need is the difference between the cost of attendance and the amount students and their family are expected to contribute (EFC - expected family contribution). Once a student is admitted to the University, and his or her file is complete, the Office of Financial Aid will update the student’s account which is viewable online via BisonWeb. 
What is a family's share? 
A student and his or her family are primarily responsible for financing the student’s education. They are expected to make a maximum effort to assist with college expenses. Students are also expected to contribute to their college expenses from sources that may include savings, summer earnings, monetary gifts from friends and relatives or other sources. Financial aid should be viewed as supplementary to the family’s contribution. 
How is a family's share determined? 
The income and asset information which a student (and his or her parents in the case of dependent students, or a spouse if married) provided on the FAFSA enables the U.S. Department of Education’s Central Processing System (CPS) to determine the expected family contribution (EFC). 

Minimum Credits Required for Financial Aid Eligibility 
    Enrollment  Status    
Fall/Spring Semester  Full Time  3/4 Time  1/2 Time  Less than 1/2 Time  
Undergraduate  12  9  6  3  

Note: Audited courses cannot be included in meeting the minimum required credit hours toward eligibility. 

Financial Aid Probation 
If at the end of the semester a student is listed as being on PROBATION of any kind (e.g. Probation for Credits, Probation for Grades and Probation for Grades/Credits), the student is still eligible to receive aid for the next semester. A student’s probationary status is a warning that he or she must meet all SAP criteria for any subsequent terms of attendance in order to maintain financial aid eligibility. A student does not do not need to appeal this status in order to receive aid. Financial aid probation will occur for a student’s next academic semester of attendance if he or she fails to earn the minimum number of credits and/or the GPA required. Such students may continue to receive financial aid while on financial aid probation. 
Types of Financial Aid Suspension 
Your financial aid eligibility will be suspended if you fail to earn the necessary credits or achieve the required GPA while on financial aid probation. At that time, you will no longer be eligible to receive financial aid to attend Howard University. To reinstate your financial aid eligibility, you must appeal to the Office of Financial Aid by the proposed deadline per semester. If a student's appeal is denied for whatever reason, they then may re-enroll and successfully complete the courses they have registered for at their own expense, at least for one semester. At the conclusion of that particular semester, students may then re-appeal to the Office of Financial Aid explaining in a detailed type-written narrative to then request to have their aid reinstated. Students cannot receive financial aid if they do not meet the necessary criteria. Students who have been suspended consecutively will be ineligible for aid reinstatement until they have covered the courses they have registered for at their own expense. Students are more than welcome to seek other sources of funding that include alternative loans that do not consider SAP to be a criterion. 
Academic Suspension 
You are not eligible to receive financial aid if you have been de-matriculated (academically suspended) from the University. When you have been readmitted by the University; a process students must complete with the Office of Admission, as a Former Student Returning, youmust complete the SAP appeal process. Your financial aid eligibility status will be determined based on the SAP criteria and a thorough a review of your academic transcript. 
Exclusions 
The following types of registration and grades cannot be used to fulfill probation, suspension or rematriculation requirements: credits by special exam, Advanced Placement or CLEP exams, distance education or correspondence courses for which you have not obtained prior approval, audit, withdrawal, incomplete and zero credit courses. 
Appeal Process 
You may appeal a financial aid suspension status by submitting a completed appeal packet to the Office of Financial Aid within 14 calendar days from the date of your notification. It is the responsibility of the student to follow up with their advisor as often as possible, throughout the semester, by checking their BisonWeb account for updates by checking their financial aid eligibility from one semester to the next, as well as their personal preferred email address for emails on pertinent deadlines and updates. 
Types of suspension that CAN BE appealed by the appropriate deadline: Suspension from the University - Student is academically suspended from the University.* Suspension for Credits - Student did not earn at least 70% of the credit hours attempted in the previous two (2) academic years. Suspension for Grades** - Student did not earn minimum GPA required for ‘good standing‘ for previous two (2) years. 
Types of suspension that CANNOT be appealed: 4 Year Undergraduate Suspension - Student has met or exceeded maximum degree timeframe (1.5 times the total minimum credit hours required for degree). 5 Year Undergraduate Suspension - Student has met or exceeded maximum degree time rame (1.5 times the total minimum credit hours required for degree) OR has more than 12 hours of incomplete credits. SAP Appeal forms are available to suspended students via BisonWeb. If you have failed to achieve SAP (Satisfactory Academic Progress) because of mitigating circumstances, your appeal packet must consist of the following: 
• 
SAP appeal form with type of suspension indicated per your BisonWeb account, 

• 
Detailed type-written narrative of what led to your suspension status, and explanation of what you intend to do to improve your plan of action, and: 

• 
Copies of all supporting documentation attached. 


Mitigating circumstances may include, but are not limited to extreme illness or injury, family crisis, or death of an immediate relative. The circumstances must be documented and will not be considered for approval without the supplemental documentation attached. Examples of documentation include medical documentation, birth or death certificates, etc. Please do not submit letters of stipulation from your school/college along with your appeal documents. If at the end of an academic school year, you have found yourself to be suspended, you may appeal to have your current SAP status reviewed by attending a summer session at Howard University and increasing your GPA or earned credits and then appealing once those grades have been submitted to the Office of the Registrar. It will not be until the summer courses are updated to your account that an evaluation of your courses can be made. Please monitor your BisonWeb account for appropriate updates as well as the email address you have provided on your appeal form. Summer credits will count toward determining your maximum eligibility for the next school year. You must complete the appeal process at the end of the summer term. Summer credits will count toward determining your maximum eligibility for next school year. 
Once your appeal has been received and reviewed by the Appeals Committee, you will receive written notification of the committee's decision by email to the address you have provided in your appeal packet. You will also notice the appropriate changes made to your award package on your BisonWeb account. Note: All incomplete appeals will be denied. All appeal decisions are final and the submission of a SAP appeal does not guarantee reinstatement of aid eligibility. Students who are currently SAP suspended are strongly advised to create alternate financial plans in the event your appeal is denied. 
Additional SAP Requirements 
If you are listed as being SUSPENDED FROM THE UNIVERSITY, the appeal process is two-fold. Step 1: You must appeal to your school/college as well as Step 2: the Office of Financial Aid. It is your responsibility to stay abreast of deadlines. Stipulation letters do notensure financial aid reinstatement and one is not contingent upon the other. For further inquiries please contact the Office of Financial Aid at http://www.howard.edu/financialaid/contacts/staff-finaid.htm 
Although you may not be receiving financial aid, you will be evaluated for financial aid eligibility on the same basis as students who receive federal and state aid. Should you apply for aid, your eligibility will be based on your prior academic performance at Howard University. 
• 
If you are enrolled in a dual degree program, you may appeal for an extension of the maximum time frame provision of this policy. 

• 
If you are an undergraduate student pursuing a second degree, you may attempt an additional 48 credit hours to complete your second degree program, including prerequisite courses. Graduate/professional students may attempt an additional 24 credit hours. 

• 
If you are a transfer student, your maximum eligibility will be reduced by the number of transfer credits accepted by Howard University. 


Credits you have earned at foreign institutions will be included in your SAP evaluation provided they are applicable to the degree/program sought. 
Courses in which you receive a grade of ‘I’ (incomplete) accompanied by a letter grade will be considered when evaluating your completion ratio and will influence your term and cumulative GPA. All attempted and earned credits are considered in maximum eligibility determination. 
Courses in which you receive a grade of ‘W’ (withdrawal) do not earn credits or affect your GPA, but they will be considered when evaluating your maximum eligibility. You may retake courses from which you withdraw and those credits will count toward determining your enrollment status and completion ratio, provided you have not earned credit for the same course. 
If you are enrolled in undergraduate remedial courses, credits attempted/earned will count toward determining your enrollment status, minimum credits earned and maximum eligibility. 
If you take undergraduate courses while you are a graduate student, courses that are satisfactorily completed do not earn graduate credit or influence your graduate GPA, nor will they count toward determining your enrollment status or minimum credits earned at the graduate level. 
All undergraduate and prerequisite courses are evaluated in SAP Maximum Eligibility. 
If you are taking courses to earn professional licensure, you must be admitted to a degree program in order to receive financial aid. Students completing licensure courses and are not seeking a bachelor's, master's, or doctoral degree are not eligible for financial aid. 
The credits earned from repeated courses will count toward the determining your enrollment status and maximum eligibility. However, for purposes of financial aid satisfactory academic progress, only credits adding to the cumulative credits earned will be accepted toward the required minimum number of credits earned per year. 
If you attend a summer session and wish those credits/grades to be considered for your fall and spring total, you must complete the appeal process at the end of the summer term. Summer credits will count toward determining your maximum eligibility. 

Federal Financial Aid Unofficial Withdrawal Policy 
Howard University is required by federal law to identify and report any student who has unofficially withdrawn from the University and is a recipient of federal student aid. As a result of this requirement, it is the policy of Howard University that all faculty members, by the end of the Mid-term of each semester, identify students who have never attended class. The faculty will be required to report this unofficial withdrawal data using the online Banner Web Grade Reporting System. A grade of “UW” (Unofficial Withdrawal) will be assigned to any student who stopped attending and participating in the course and did not officially withdraw. A grade of “NR” (Never Reported) will be assigned to any student who never attended or who stop attending without officially withdrawing will adversely affect their grade point averages through the failing grades they will earn at the end of the semester. 

Howard University Refunds and Adjustments of Title IV Funds 
Students who withdraw from the University within the first 60% of the semester will receive an adjustment to their Student Financial Aid. This adjustment to a student’s Financial Aid will be based on a percentage which represents the amount of time remaining in the semester and will be applied to the total institutional charges assessed to the student, as well as the Title IV financial aid applied to the student’s account. 
The percentage that represents the amount of time remaining in the semester shall be determined by dividing the total number of calendar days in the semester not completed by the student by the total calendar days in the semester. The total calendar days in the semester begins with the first day of classes, ends with the last scheduled day of exams, includes weekends, but excludes scheduled breaks of five or more days and days that the student was on an approved leave of absence. No adjustments will be made to a student’s Financial Aid if the percentage representing the amount of time remaining in the semester is less than 40%. 
The University will refund the amounts due from the University and the student to the appropriate Title IV program in the following order: 
• 
Unsubsidized Federal Stafford Loans 

• 
Subsidized Federal Stafford Loans 

• 
Unsubsidized Federal Direct Stafford Loans 

• 
Subsidized Federal Direct Stafford Loans 

• 
Federal Perkins Loan 

• 
Federal PLUS Loans Federal Direct PLUS Loans 


If unearned funds remain to be returned after repayment of all outstanding loan amounts, the remaining excess must be credited to any amount awarded for the payment period of enrollment for which a return of funds if required in the following order: 
• 
Federal Pell Grants 

• 
Federal SEOG 

• 
Other grants or loan assistance authorized by Title IV of the HEA. 


The University will assume the responsibility for making the appropriate refunds to the Title IV programs for overpayments received by the student, as well as overpayments received by the University. It is the responsibility of the student to pay the University for these overpayments within 90 days of the date that the student withdrew from the University. Failure to repay the University the amounts of the overpayments will jeopardize the student’s eligibility for further Title IV financial assistance at Howard University as well as other institutions of higher education. 

Schedule of Financial Adjustments and/or Refunds 
Students who make changes to their academic program after the first day of instruction may be subject to adjusted or prorated tuition and fees. The adjustment periods and corresponding fee changes are listed in the University Calendar. 
If the University cancels a students’ registration, the refund is 100%. Please also note that the above refund policies apply to total semester charges. If a due date falls on Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday, the next business day shall be the deadline that will apply. 
NOTE: THE ENROLLMENT FEE IS NON-REFUNDABLE. 

Explanation of Fees 
Direct costs are items that will appear on your University bill, such as tuition, fees, and room and board (if you live on campus). This is the cost of a Howard University education. 
Indirect costs will not appear on your bill, but are estimated costs associated with going to college and should be included in your budget. These include items like books, transportation and personal/miscellaneous expenses. 
 
Detailed descriptions of direct and indirect costs 
Direct Costs that appear on your bill from Howard University: 
Tuition and Fees: These figures reflect the cost of tuition and fees for a student taking 12-18 credits during each of the fall and spring semesters of the respective academic year (which is considered full- time). 
Housing and Meals: The number reflected here is the cost of the most popular meal plan chosen by students who live on campus. 
University Mandatory Fees (Breakdown) 
• 
Student Activity- includes student activities, campus health services and other benefits. 

• 
Self Help Fee- student voted fee to establish the student Self Help Emergency Fund. Available for all currently enrolled students. 

• 
Endowment Fee- student voted fee to participate in increasing the University’s endowment ffund. 

• 
Technology Fee- for use of university email, labs, IT services, etc. 

• 
Globalization Fee - funds used at the schools’ discretion to finance the study abroad program. ** 

• 
Fee charged in the Fall semester for Undergraduate students only. 

• 
Excess Tuition Fee- assessed if students exceed the maximum allowable credits as determined by each school. 

• 
Orientation Fee- non-refundable mandatory fee for all First Time in College & New Transfers. Funds will be used to offset expenses related to orientation materials, including but not limited to HU backpacks, meals during the one-day session, rental fees, printing, etc. ** $200 fee will be assessed upon students initial term at the University. 

• 
Graduation Fee - covers the cost of the diploma including mailing fees and other expenses associated with graduation. 


External Med USMLE Board Exam - Fee (MED) – covers costs associated with taking the United Stated Medical Licensing (USMLE) Exam. 
Medicine Mandatory Fee - covers association membership, disability insurance, standardized patient usage, simulation lab usage, and computer program / clinical software. 
Dentistry Mandatory Fee – covers association membership, disability insurance, books, instruments, central materials, simulation lab usage, and clinical software. 
CIF Exam Fee (DENT) - covers costs associated with taking the Curriculum Integrated Format (CIF) Exam. 
Nursing & Allied Health Sciences Mandatory Fee – covers ExamSoft, MedHub, simulation lab usage, association membership, lab supplies, e-books, assessment software, board exam preparation, and credentialing fee. 
Pharmacy Mandatory Fee – covers CPR training, Medication Therapy Management Training, Immunization Certification Training, ExamSoft, clinical lab usage, technology support for classrooms and labs, and simulation lab usage. 
Communications Mandatory Fee – covers lab supplies and production expenses. Law Mandatory Fee – covers technology use and student activities. 
Social Work Mandatory Fee – covers student professional development activity expenses. Divinity Mandatory Fee – covers technology use and student activities costs. 
Graduate Certificate Program Fee (GRAD) – covers less than the actual direct cost for administering the program but is offered to students as a credentialing opportunity. It provides educational and support facilities for graduate students, faculty, and support staff to cover materials, travel, or other special costs above normal certificate tuition costs. The fee also offsets cost associated with registration, record keeping and graduation. This fee is separate from the one-time enrollment fee required by the Office of Enrollment Management. The revenue also provides the resources to design, develop, and offer new certificate programs and co-curricula activities. The fee assessed by the Graduate School covers, but not limited to costs associated with: printing for course packs, handouts, etc; technology and research course materials; payment of certificate program directors; and payment of adjunct graduate faculty. 
Graduate Development Fee (GRAD) - helps defray associated costs based on the actual usage of an individual student that are not reflected in the regular tuition cost. The fee is assessed to help pay a small portion of the university's overall acquisition and dissemination of resources to registered graduate students. The development fee is used but is not limited to: Providing graduate student with assistance with specific technology costs that may not be supported by the University tuition for specific research and classroom purposes; Assisting with additional classroom instructional costs; Providing expanded computer and research lab expenses; Assisting with conference travel costs and registration both nationally and internationally; Assisting with cost associated with workshops and presentations; Providing professional development programming to graduate students; Providing students with an opportunity to participate in cultural, social, educational, and recreational events throughout the academic year; and Providing biomedical and STEM students with laboratory materials and other research-related expenses. 
Indirect Costs that DO NOT appear on your bill from Howard University: 
Books and Supplies: This is an estimate of the cost of books and supplies for a typical student for the entire academic year. You will not be billed directly by Howard University for books or supplies. You can purchase these items at the University’s Barnes & Noble bookstore. The supply cost assumes that students do not have a computer, and allows for a student to purchase a personal computer. 
Transportation: This is an estimate of the cost of traveling to and from campus or the cost of operating and maintaining a vehicle. The cost also assumes 3 round trips bus/plane tickets to and from campus to your family’s home. Unless you buy a Howard University parking permit, you will not be billed directly for transportation costs. This line item will not appear on your bill. 
Personal Expenses: This is an estimate of costs for clothing, haircuts, entertainment, etc. for the year. Money spent on these types of items will vary from student to student. These items will not appear on your Howard University bill. 
Average Loan Fees: There is an origination fee of 1.059% for Federal Direct Subsidized and Unsubsidized student loans, which is taken out of the loan before funds are sent to Howard University. Some of our parents opt to take advantage of the Parent PLUS loan. The fee amount varies with the amount borrowed from the federal government. 

Official Notice of Student Charges 
Academic Year 2021-2022 
Howard University hereby announces the tuition rates, housing rates, meal plan rates, and student fees for the 2021-22 Academic Year. 
In announcing the student charges for the academic year, Howard University wishes to emphasize that Howard's tuition remains low compared to other private universities in the D.C. region, and compared to other similarly ranked private universities in the U.S. overall. Student charges at Howard also compare favorably to student charges at other Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). 
This notice details all the approved tuition rates and other student charges that have been approved and/or re-affirmed by Howard University’s Board of Trustees. 
For the 2021-22 academic year, the Board has approved the following changes in student charges: 
• 
A 7.5% increase in undergraduate tuition 

• 
Establishing the undergraduate per credit hour rates calculations to equal 1/12th of the full-time undergraduate tuition rate 

• 
Amending the previously approved Summer 2021 undergraduate per credit hour rate to equal the current AY2020-21 undergraduate per credit hour rate 

• 
Eliminating the Student Health Insurance Fee as a mandatory fee 

• 
A 20% increase in the mandatory Technology Fee 

• 
School-specific tuition and fees adjustments as listed herein 

• 
An average 3% increase in housing rates 

• 
An average 3.8% increase in dining rates 


All other student fees, including school and course-specific fees, have been reaffirmed. 
Tuition and Enrollment Related Fees – General Information 
Pricing - Tuition is based on (a) the enrollment status of the student, (b) the semester, and (c) the school or college attended. 
Enrollment Status 
• 
Full-time status is when a student is enrolled in a minimum of 12 credits in the fall AND spring semester. 

• 
Part-time status is when a student is enrolled in less than 12 credits in the fall OR spring semester. 


Semesters 
Tuition is based on the semester, and the student’s enrollment status. 
• 
For full time students: a flat rate tuition is charged. Included in the tuition is a total of 42 credits that may be taken throughout the academic year, which includes the fall, spring, and (if eligible) summer semesters. . 
For the fall and spring semesters: tuition covers between 12 – 21 credits. Credits taken above the maximum of 21 credits are charged an additional amount, based on the full- time excess credit rate. 

. 
For summer semester: . 
If a student qualifies for the STAGE award, up to 6 credits are included, based on payment in full of full-time fall and spring tuition, as well as other criteria set forth in the STAGE award program. Credits that are ineligible for the STAGE award are charged based on the summer semester credit rate. 

. 
If a student does not qualify for the STAGE award, then the summer semester credit rate is used per credit taken. 







• 
For part time students: . 
For fall and spring semester: a part time credit rate is applied to credits taken. 

. 
For summer semester: a summer semester credit rate is applied to credits taken. 





Application of Payments to Student Charges 
When a student submits a payment to their student account, payments are applied in order based on a hierarchy of charges, as follows: 
1. 
Tuition 

2. 
Fees 

3. 
Housing 

4. 
Meal Plan 

5. 
Parking 


Application Fees and Good Faith Enrollment Deposits 
Howard University requires the following non-refundable out-of-pocket deposits for enrollment. These deposits are credited to the charges on a student’s account once the student is actively enrolled: 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
University Application Fee 
  
  
 
Undergraduate 
 Application 
 $45.00 
 
Graduate 
 Application 
 $75.00 
 
Undergraduate Programs 
  
  
 
Enrollment Fee 
 Acceptance into Program 
 $300.00 
 
Graduate Programs 
  
  
 
Enrollment Fee 
 Acceptance into Program 
 $300.00 
 
College of Dentistry 
  
  
 
Good Faith Deposit 
 Acceptance into Program 
 $700.00 
 
Enrollment Fee 
 Acceptance into Program 
 $300.00 
 
College of Medicine 
  
  
 
Good Faith Deposit 
 Acceptance into Program 
 $100.00 
 
Enrollment Fee 
 Acceptance into Program 
 $300.00 
 
College of Pharmacy 
  
  
 
Good Faith Deposit 
 Acceptance into Program 
 $700.00 
 
Enrollment Fee 
 Acceptance into Program 
 $300.00 
 
Executive MBA Program 
  
  
 
Good Faith Deposit 
 Acceptance into Program 
 $200.00 
 
Enrollment Fee 
 Acceptance into Program 
 $300.00 
 
School of Law 
  
  
 
Good Faith Deposit 
 Acceptance into Program 
 $200.00 
 
Enrollment Fee 
 Acceptance into Program 
 $300.00 
 
Transfer Students 
  
  
 
Enrollment Fee 
 Acceptance into Program 
 $300.00 
 

University Wide Fees 
The following are mandatory fees applied to all students unless otherwise noted. 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost 
 
Orientation Fee 
 First Semester Only 
 $200 
 
Graduation Fee 
 Last Semester Only 
 $100 
 
Student Activity Fee 
 Per Semester 
 $63 
 
Endowment Fee 
 Per Semester 
 $15 
 
Student Self-Help Fund Fee 
 Per Semester 
 $5 
 
Technology Fee 
 Per Semester 
 $150 
 

Description of University-Wide Fees 
• 
Enrollment Fee: A fee to fund enrollment related expenses. 

• 
Orientation Fee: A fee to fund expenses related to activities and programs during orientation. 

• 
Graduation Fee: A fee to pay for graduation related activities, materials, and programs. 

• 
Student Activity Fee: A fee to fund student activities. This fee will not increase unless a change is requested and ratified under the procedures established by the Howard University Student Association. 

• 
Endowment Fee: A student-voted fee to contribute to the University Endowment. 

• 
Student Self-Help Fund Fee: A student-voted fee to establish a Student Self Help Emergency Fund. Available for all currently enrolled students. 

• 
Technology Fee: A fee to fund use of university email, IT labs, and other IT services. 


Tuition and Fee Charges 
Howard University is composed of 13 school and colleges, listed below. 
1. 
College of Arts and Sciences 

2. 
College of Dentistry 

3. 
College of Engineering & Architecture 

4. 
College of Medicine 

5. 
College of Nursing & Allied Health Sciences 

6. 
College of Pharmacy 

7. 
Graduate School 

8. 
School of Business 

9. 
School of Communication 

10. 
School of Divinity 

11. 
School of Education 

12. 
School of Law 

13. 
School of Social Work 


Of these schools, five offer undergraduate degrees. While undergraduate tuition rates are uniform across the schools and colleges, graduate tuition may differ by program. Furthermore, each school or college has its own fees that support its curriculum, instructional programs, and related provided services. 
In the subsequent subsections, tuition and fees are presented by college or school. 
Undergraduate Tuition Charges 
The following tuition rates apply to all undergraduate programs at Howard University. 
Degree Programs 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Full Time Tuition 
 Per Semester 
 $14,225 
 
Full Time Excess Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $758 
 
Part Time Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,185 
 
Summer Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,185 
 

 
Undergraduate Certificate Programs – College of Dentistry 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Certificate in Dental Hygiene Program 
 Per Semester 
 $14,225 
 

School and College Specific Charges 
 
College of Arts and Sciences 
Graduate Programs 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Master of Fine Arts 
 Per Semester 
 $16,930 
 
Master of Music 
 Per Semester 
 $16,930 
 
Part Time Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,838 
 
Summer Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,838 
 

General Fees 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Undergraduate Globalization Fee 
 First Semester 
 $100 
 

Course Related Fees 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
ARTD105 Typography I 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
ARTD106 Design for Advertising I 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
ARTE080 Computers in the Arts 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
BIOL 441 Endocrinology 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
BIOL 450 Molecular Biology 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
BIOL101 General Biology I 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
BIOL102 General Biology I 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
BIOL200 Genetics 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
BIOL220 Gen Microbiology 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
BIOL230 Ecology 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
BIOL310 Cell Bio.Histology 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
BIOL320 Molecular Biology 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
BIOL341 Animal Physiology 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
BIOL344 Plant Physiology 
 Per Course 
 $25 
 
BIOL390 Plant Physiology 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
BIOL406 Exper Parasitology 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
BIOL407 Ichthyology 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
BIOL409 Animal Behavior 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
BIOL416 Adv Cytology 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
BIOL425 Path Bacteriology 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
BIOL426 Food Microbiology 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
BIOL430 Biostatistics 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
BIOL449 Pop Genetics 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
CHEM005 General Chemistry 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
CHEM006 General Chemistry 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
CHEM092 Special Lab Projects 
 Per Course 
 $100 
 
CHEM093 Special Lab Projects 
 Per Course 
 $100 
 
CHEM105 Techniques Inorg. Chemistry Lab 
 Per Course 
 $100 
 

CHEM123 Analytical Chemistry Lab 
 Per Course 
 $100 
 
CHEM127 Instrumental Analytic Lab 
 Per Course 
 $100 
 
CHEM145 Organic Chemistry Lab 
 Per Course 
 $100 
 
CHEM157 Biochemistry Survey Lab 
 Per Course 
 $100 
 
CHEM173 Physical Chemistry 
 Per Course 
 $100 
 
CHEM174 Physical Chemistry 
 Per Course 
 $100 
 
CHEM182 Chem for Health Sci 
 Per Course 
 $100 
 
CHEM183 Chem for Health Sci 
 Per Course 
 $100 
 
CHEM745 Organic Chem Lab (Writing) 
 Per Course 
 $100 
 
PHYS001 General Physics 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
PHYS002 General Physics II 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
PHYS015 Phys For Health Serv 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
PHYS023 Phys For Sci & Eng. I 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
PHYS024 Phys For Sci & Eng. II 
 Per Course 
 $25 
 
PHYS025 Phys For Sci & Eng. III 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
PHYS176 Optics 
 Per Course 
 $25 
 
PHYS702 Exper. Physics I (Writ) 
 Per Course 
 $25 
 
PSYC051 Exper. Psychology 
 Per Course 
 $25 
 

College of Dentistry 
Graduate Programs 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Doctor of Dental Surgery (DDS) 
 Per Semester 
 $21,316 
 
International Dentist Program 
 Per Semester 
 $26,354 
 
International Dentist Program 
 Summer Term 
 $10,542 
 
Certificate in Orthodontics 
 Per Semester 
 $21,316 
 
Certificate in Pediatric Dentistry 
 Per Semester 
 $21,316 
 
Certificate in Advanced Education in General 
Dentistry (AEGD) 
 Per Semester 
 $3,705 
 
5th Year DDS per Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $927 
 

Undergraduate Fees (Dental Hygiene) 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Undergraduate Globalization Fee 
 First Semester 
 $100.00 
 
Disability Insurance Fee/Dentistry 
 Fall Semester 
 $108.00 
 

Graduate Fees 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Books & Instruments/DN1 
 Fall Semester 
 $5,550 
 
Books & Instruments/DN1 
 Spring Semester 
 $7,354 
 
Books & Instruments/DN2 
 Fall Semester 
 $5,830 
 
Books & Instruments/DN2 
 Spring Semester 
 $5,120 
 
Books & Instruments/DN3 
 Fall Semester 
 $5,428 
 
Books & Instruments/DN4 
 Fall Semester 
 $1,950 
 
Books & Instruments/IDP3 
 Summer Term 
 $7,322 
 

Books & Instruments/IDP4 
 Fall Semester 
 $1,572 
 
Association Fee/Dentistry 
 Fall Semester 
 $160 
 
Disability Insurance Fee/Dentistry 
 Fall Semester 
 $108 
 
Central Materials D1 
 Spring Semester 
 $450 
 
Central Materials D2/D3/D4/IDP 
 Per Semester 
 $1,375 
 
Central Materials AEGD Residents 
 Per Semester 
 $500 
 
Central Materials Post-Doc Ortho and Pedo Students 
 Per Semester 
 $1,000 
 
Medicine Simulation Lab Fee D2 
 Fall Semester 
 $300 
 
eHuman Software Applications D1 
 Fall Semester 
 $391 
 

College of Engineering & Architecture 
 General Fees 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Undergraduate Globalization Fee 
 First Semester 
 $100 
 
Master of Architecture Technology 
 Per Semester 
 $125 
 

Course Related Fees 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
COMP001 Life Science 
 Per Course 
 $75 
 
COMP002 Planetary Science 
 Per Course 
 $15 
 
COMP004 Computer & Society 1 
 Per Course 
 $15 
 
COSD241 A & P of Sp Hear Mech 
 Per Course 
 $50 
 
COSD372 Lab Instrument 
 Per Course 
 $50 
 
COSD464 Clinical Pract 
 Per Course 
 $100 
 
COSD561 Neuroana & Neuphys 
 Per Course 
 $50 
 
COSD531 Clinical Practicum 
 Per Course 
 $150 
 
COSD533 Clinical Practicum III 
 Per Course 
 $150 
 

 College of Medicine 
Graduate Programs 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Doctor of Medicine Program (M.D.) 
 Per Semester 
 $23,053 
 
Part Time Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,806 
 
Summer Directed Study Program 
 Summer Term 
 $600 
 

General Fees 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Association Fee 
 Academic Year 
 $42 
 
Comprehensive Fee 
 Per Semester 
 $252 
 
Disability Insurance Fee 
 Per Semester 
 $39 
 
Computer Program Fee 
 Academic Year 
 $50 
 
Standard Patient Fees 
 Academic Year 
 $300 
 
Simulation Lab Fee 
 Academic Year 
 $300 
 

College of Nursing & Allied Health Sciences 
 Graduate Programs 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Doctor of Physical Therapy 
 Per Semester 
 $17,774 
 
Doctor of Physical Therapy (Online) 
 Per Semester 
 $17,774 
 
Doctor of Occupational Therapy (OTD) 
 Per Semester 
 $17,774 
 
Post Professional Degree in Occupational Therapy 
(Online) 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,080 
 
Post-Professional Degree in Physical Therapy 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,804 
 
Master of Science in Occupational Therapy 
 Per Semester 
 $16,774 
 
Master of Science in Nursing 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,615 
 
Family Nurse Practitioner Certificate Program 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,615 
 
Full Time Excess Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,165 
 
Part Time Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,615 
 
Summer Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,615 
 

Undergraduate Fees – All Students 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Undergraduate Globalization Fee 
 First Semester 
 $100 
 
CNAHS Examsoft Years 2-4 
 Per Semester 
 $60 
 
CNAHS Medhub Years 2-4 
 Per Semester 
 $55 
 
Simulation Lab Fee Years 3-4, Excl. Health Management and Health Sciences Tracks 
  
Per Semester 
  
$150 
 

Undergraduate Fees – By Program Track 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Health Management Professional Fee 
 Fall Semester 
 $35 
 
Nursing - Electronic Bundle Year 3 
 Per Semester 
 $190 
 
Nursing - Lab Supplies Year 3 
 Fall Semester 
 $100 
 
Nursing - Simulation Year 3 
 Per Semester 
 $110 
 
Nursing - Assessment Technology Years 3-4 
 Per Semester 
 $170 
 
Nursing - Electronic Bundle Year 4 
 Per Semester 
 $240 
 
Nursing - Exam Preparation Year 4 
 Per Semester 
 $125 
 
Nursing - Simulation Year 4 
 Fall Semester 
 $165 
 
Nutritional Science – Professional Fee 
 Fall Semester 
 $200 
 
Physical Therapy – Professional Fee (DC) 
 Fall Semester 
 $25 
 
Physical Therapy - Professional Fee (National) 
 Per Semester 
 $80 
 
Radiation Therapy - Prof Fee 
 Fall Semester 
 $75 
 
Radiation Therapy - Lab Fee Years 3-4 
 Per Semester 
 $190 
 

 Graduate Fees – All Students 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
CNAHS Examsoft (Medhub) 
 Per Semester 
 $55 
 

Graduate Fees by Program Track – All Students 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Nursing - Graduate Simulation Yr. 1 
 Fall Semester 
 $270 
 
Nutritional Science – Professional Fee 
 Fall Semester 
 $200 
 
Occupational Therapy - Lab Fee 
 Per Semester 
 $150 
 
Occupational Therapy – Professional Fee 
 Fall Semester 
 $200 
 
Physical Therapy - Prof Fee: APTA DC Chapter 
 Fall Semester 
 $25 
 
Physical Therapy - Prof Fee: APTA Nat’l Chpt. 
 Per Semester 
 $80 
 
Physical Therapy – Professional Fee 
 Per Semester 
 $125 
 
Radiation Therapy - Credentialing Fee Yr. 4 
 Spring Semester 
 $200 
 

Course Related Fees 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Nursing - Family Nurse Review 
 Graduating Year 
 $425 
 
Nutritional Science – Dietetics Lab Fee 
 Per Course 
 $100 
 
Physical Therapy - Lab Fee 
 Per Course 
 $100 
 

College of Pharmacy 
 Graduate Programs 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Doctor of Pharmacy (PharmD) 
 Per Semester 
 $15,421 
 
Doctor Non-Traditional (Online) 
 Per Semester 
 $12,953 
 
Part Time Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,440 
 
Summer Credit Rate (non-standard courses only) 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,715 
 

Doctor of Pharmacy (PharmD) Fees 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
CPR Training Year 1 
 Spring Semester 
 $85 
 
Medication Therapy Management Year 3 
 Spring Semester 
 $135 
 
Pharmacy Board Prep Fee Year 4 
 Per Semester 
 $300 
 
Pharmacy Clinical Lab Fee Year 1-3 
 Per Semester 
 $134 
 
Pharmacy Immunization Certificate Year 2 
 Fall Semester 
 $135 
 
Professional Fee 
 Per Semester 
 $200 
 
Simulation Fee (Lab Fee) Year 2 
 Fall Semester 
 $300 
 
Simulation Fee (Standard Patient Fee) Year 2 
 Spring Semester 
 $300 
 
Simulation Fee (Lab Fee) Year 3 
 Fall Semester 
 $300 
 
Simulation Fee (Standard Patient Fee) Year 3 
 Spring Semester 
 $300 
 

Graduate School 
 For a complete list of master and doctoral programs offered by the Graduate School, please visithttps://gs.howard.edu/ 
Graduate Programs 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Full Time Doctoral Programs 
 Per Semester 
 $16,930 
 
PhD Candidate Tuition 
 Per Semester 
 $2,812 
 
Full Time Master Programs 
 Per Semester 
 $16,930 
 
Master in Public Health 
 Summer Term 
 $16,930 
 
Part Time Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,838 
 
Summer Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,838 
 

General Fees 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Graduate Development Fee 
 Per Semester 
 $125 
 

Graduate Certificate Program Fees 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Graduate Certificate Program Fee 
 Per Semester 
 $400 
 

School of Business 
 Graduate Programs 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Master of Accountancy 
  
  
 
Option 1: Summer Start 
  
  
 
Summer Tuition 
 Summer Term 
 $7,000 
 
Academic Year 
 Per Semester 
 $16,500 
 
Part-Time Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,700 
 
Option 2: Fall Start 
  
  
 
Academic Year 
 Per Semester 
 $20,000 
 
Part-Time Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,700 
 
Master of Science in Finance 
  
  
 
Option 1: Summer Start 
  
  
 
Summer Tuition 
 Summer Term 
 $7,000 
 
Academic Year 
 Per Semester 
 $16,500 
 
Part-Time Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,700 
 
Option 2: Fall Start 
  
  
 
Academic Year 
 Per Semester 
 $20,000 
 
Part-Time Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,700 
 
Master of Business Administration Program 
 Per Semester 
 $17,508 
 
MBA Full Time Excess Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,308 
 
MBA Part Time Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,895 
 
MBA Summer Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,895 
 
Executive Master of Business Administration 
 Per Semester 
 $13,180 
 

EMBA Part Time Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,900 
 
Online MBA Program 
  
  
 
MBA Part Time Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,895 
 
Online EMBA Program 
 Per Semester 
 $13,180 
 
EMBA Part Time Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,900 
 

 General Fees 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Undergraduate Globalization Fee 
 First Semester 
 $100 
 
Global Trilateral MBA Program Year 2 
 Spring Semester 
 $5,000 
 

School of Communications 
 Graduate Programs 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Master of Fine Arts in Film 
 Per Semester 
 $15,654 
 
Part Time Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,700 
 
Summer Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,700 
 

General Fees 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Undergraduate Globalization Fee 
 First Semester 
 $100 
 
Undergraduate School of Comm. Lab Fee 
 Fall Semester 
 $200 
 
Graduate Certificate Program Fee 
 Per Semester 
 $400 
 
Graduate Development Fee 
 Per Semester 
 $125 
 
Graduate MFA Film Student Production Fee 
 Per Semester 
 $750 
 

Course Related Fees 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
JOUR201 Fund of Journalism 
 Per Course 
 $35 
 
JOUR202 Reporting & Writing 
 Per Course 
 $35 
 
JOUR301 Adver Rep Writing 
 Per Course 
 $35 
 
JOUR308 Copy Editing 
 Per Course 
 $35 
 
JOUR311 Bcast Journalism I 
 Per Course 
 $10 
 
JOUR312 Bcast Journalism II 
 Per Course 
 $10 
 
JOUR313 Newsvision Lab 
 Per Course 
 $35 
 
JOUR321 Adver Copy & Des 
 Per Course 
 $35 
 
JOUR322 Media Plan & Buy 
 Per Course 
 $35 
 
JOUR330 PR Writing I 
 Per Course 
 $35 
 
JOUR331 PR Writing II 
 Per Course 
 $35 
 
JOUR333 Cap Comm Lab 
 Per Course 
 $35 
 
RTVF111 Intro Mass Comm 
 Per Course 
 $35 
 
RTVF211 Survey of Comm Res 
 Per Course 
 $35 
 
RTVF213 Hist Of BCast & Film 
 Per Course 
 $35 
 
RTVF215 Comm Policy 
 Per Course 
 $35 
 
RTVF231 Intro to Media Prod 
 Per Course 
 $30 
 

RTVF232 Basic TV & Film Prod 
 Per Course 
 $65 
 
RTVF322 Radio Production 
 Per Course 
 $30 
 
RTVF324 Bcast Announcing 
 Per Course 
 $65 
 
RTVF326 Videography 
 Per Course 
 $65 
 
RTVF331 TV Directing 
 Per Course 
 $65 
 
RTVF334 Scriptwriting 
 Per Course 
 $65 
 
RTVF342 Cinematography 
 Per Course 
 $65 
 
RTVF346 Blacks in Film 
 Per Course 
 $65 
 
RTVF352 Bcast Adv & Sales 
 Per Course 
 $35 
 
RTVF423 Adv Radio 
 Per Course 
 $65 
 
RTVF431 Adv Radio Prod 
 Per Course 
 $65 
 
RTVF441 Documentary Film 
 Per Course 
 $65 
 
RTVF443 Film Directing 
 Per Course 
 $65 
 
RTVF451 Bcast Mgmt 
 Per Course 
 $35 
 

 School of Divinity 
Graduate Programs 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Doctor of Ministry 
 Per Semester 
 $9,495 
 
Master of Divinity 
 Per Semester 
 $9,495 
 
Master of Arts in Religious Studies 
 Per Semester 
 $9,495 
 
Full Time Excess Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $755 
 
Part Time Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,055 
 
Summer Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $980 
 

General Fees 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Student Service Fee 
 Per Semester 
 $75 
 

 School of Education 
Graduate Programs 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Doctor of Education 
 Per Semester 
 $15,272 
 
Master of Education 
 Per Semester 
 $15,272 
 
Part Time Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,696 
 
Summer Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,696 
 

General Fees 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Undergraduate Globalization Fee 
 First Semester 
 $100 
 

 Course Related Fees 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
HUDE322 Testing Lab Fee 
 Per Course 
 $66 
 
HUDE429 Testing Lab Fee 
 Per Course 
 $21 
 
HUDE432 Testing Lab Fee 
 Per Course 
 $40 
 

 School of Law 
Graduate Programs 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Juris Doctor (JD) 
 Per Semester 
 $17,672 
 
Master of Laws (LLM) 
 Per Semester 
 $17,672 
 
Part Time Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,907 
 
Summer Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,907 
 

General Fees 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Computer Lab Fee 
 Per Semester 
 $75 
 

JD Program 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Law Admin Fee – Year 1 
 Per Semester 
 $250 
 
Law Admin Fee – Year 2 
 Per Semester 
 $250 
 
Law Admin Fee – Year 3 
 Per Semester 
 $250 
 

 School of Social Work 
Graduate Programs 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Master of Social Work 
 Per Semester 
 $16,437 
 
Part Time Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,748 
 
Summer Credit Rate 
 Per Credit Hour 
 $1,748 
 

General Fees 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Professional Development Fee 
 Per Semester 
 $125 
 

 Other Enrollment-Related Fees 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Late Registration Fee 
 Per Semester 
 $175 
 
Late Payment Fee 
 Instance 
 $100 
 
Change of Program Fee 
 Course 
 $20 
 
Thesis Binding Fee 
 Thesis 
 $60 
 
Transcript Fee 
 Transcript 
 $8 
 
Diploma Replacement Fee 
 Diploma 
 $55 
 

Other Information about Tuition Charges 
Dual Degree Programs 
• 
Dual degree candidates will be charged tuition based on the school or college that administrates the dual degree program. For instance: 

• 
The School of Social Work offers dual degree programs with the School of Business and the School of Divinity; therefore, a student will be charged the tuition associated with the School of Social Work for the duration of the dual degree program. 


Tuition Discounts 
Howard has programs where eligible students may qualify for tuition discounts. 
Undergraduate Tuition Discount for Multiple Siblings Concurrently Enrolled 
A ten percent (10%) undergraduate tuition discount is available for multiple siblings who are attending Howard University concurrently in full-time status effective August 15, 2017. In cases where siblings from the same family are enrolled in both undergraduate and graduate and professional degree programs, the discount will only apply to the tuition of the undergraduate students. 
Please refer to the published policy for complete detail on guidelines and eligibility. 
Undergraduate Tuition Discount for Multiple Siblings Concurrently Enrolled 
The Summer Tuition Assistance Grant for Excellence (STAGE) is available to qualified undergraduate students who were enrolled full-time during both the fall and spring semesters. 
To be considered for this grant, students must meet the following criteria: 
• 
Admitted as a degree-seeking undergraduate student 

• 
Enrolled in a minimum of 12 credits for Fall and Spring semesters within the same Academic Year 

• 
Making Satisfactory Academic Progress (SAP) 

• 
Completed a Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) by the deadline (Domestic Students Only) 

• 
Must have a zero balance – i.e., be paid in full for the preceding fall and spring semesters -- by the deadline 

• 
Have earned less than 42 credits for the 2017-2018 academic year, which would be the sum of credits for Fall, Spring, and Summer semesters 


Please refer to the published policy for complete detail on guidelines and eligibility. 
Housing Rates and Fees 
For several of the student resident halls, Howard University partners with property management firms to administer residential life programs and provide property management services. 
Howard’s agreements with these entities provide for rates to be set by the managing committees for the facilities. 
For AY2021 – 2022, Howard University and the management review committees approved the following changes to housing rates and fees as reflected below. 
Housing Deposit and Fees 
Howard University requires the following non-refundable out-of-pocket deposits for housing, which are credited to the charges on a student’s account once the student is actively enrolled: 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Housing Good Faith Deposit 
 Acceptance into Housing 
 $200 
 
Housing Application Fee 
 Fall Semester 
 $50 
 

Resident Hall Rates 
The following sections detail rates for each HU student dormitory. 
Axis (Howard Center) 
Managed by Corvias. Leases in this facility are targeted towards graduate students and require a year’s lease. 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Amenity Fee (Efficiencies)* 
 Monthly 
 $200 
 
Amenity Fee (One Bedroom Units)* 
 Monthly 
 $250 
 
One Bedroom 
 Monthly 
 $2,546 
 
Third Floor Units 
 Monthly 
 $1,538 
 
Fourth Floor Type A 
 Monthly 
 $1,432 
 
Fourth Floor Type B 
 Monthly 
 $1,538 
 
Fifth Floor Units 
 Monthly 
 $1,644 
 
Sixth Floor Units 
 Monthly 
 $1,644 
 
Seventh Floor Units 
 Monthly 
 $1,698 
 
Eighth Floor Units 
 Monthly 
 $1,698 
 
Ninth Floor Units 
 Monthly 
 $1,752 
 

*The amenity fee covers utilities (electricity, water/sewer, and internet), as well as building amenities including gym and yoga studio, lounge and conferencing space, gaming space, on- site management, and concierge service. 
Bethune Annex 
Managed by Howard University. 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Single Full Bath, Mini.Kitchen 
 Per Semester 
 $5,708 
 
Single Shared Bath 
 Per Semester 
 $5,178 
 
Double Shared Bath 
 Per Semester 
 $3,746 
 
Triple Shared Bath 
 Per Semester 
 $3,036 
 

College Hall North 
Managed by Provident Group. 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Double Full Bath 
 Per Semester 
 $5,004 
 
Triple Full Bath 
 Per Semester 
 $4,264 
 

College Hall South 
 Managed by Provident Group. 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Double Full Bath 
 Per Semester 
 $5,004 
 
Triple Full Bath 
 Per Semester 
 $4,264 
 

Cook Hall 
Managed by Corvias. 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Single Full Bath 
 Per Semester 
 $5,528 
 
Single Shared Shower 
 Per Semester 
 $5,212 
 
Double Full bath 
 Per Semester 
 $3,900 
 
Double Shared Bath 
 Per Semester 
 $3,752 
 
Triple Shared Bath 
 Per Semester 
 $3,182 
 

Drew Hall 
Managed by Corvias. 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Single Full Bath 
 Per Semester 
 $5,528 
 
Single Shared Bath 
 Per Semester 
 $5,214 
 
Standard Single 
 Per Semester 
 $4,812 
 
Standard Double 
 Per Semester 
 $3,514 
 
Standard Triple 
 Per Semester 
 $3,234 
 

 Harriet Tubman Quadrangle 
Managed by Corvias. 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Standard Single 
 Per Semester 
 $5,866 
 
Standard Double 
 Per Semester 
 $4,226 
 
Standard Triple 
 Per Semester 
 $4,448 
 
Standard Single with A/C 
 Per Semester 
 $5,866 
 
Standard Double with A/C 
 Per Semester 
 $4,226 
 

 Howard Plaza East 
Managed by Corvias. 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Two Person Suite (Single Rooms) 
 Per Semester 
 $5,984 
 
Standard Single 
 Per Semester 
 $5,498 
 
Studio (Double Rooms) 
 Per Semester 
 $4,434 
 
Standard Large (Double Occupancy) 
 Per Semester 
 $3,768 
 

Howard Plaza West 
 Managed by Corvias. 
Charge Description 
 Unit Charge 
 Cost ($) 
 
Two Person Suite (Single Rooms) 
 Per Semester 
 $5,984 
 
Standard Single 
 Per Semester 
 $5,498 
 
Studio (Double Rooms) 
 Per Semester 
 $4,434 
 
Standard Large (Double Occupancy) 
 Per Semester 
 $3,768 
 

Meal Plan Fees 
Howard University uses Sodexo, a food services management firm, to provide dining services on Howard’s campus. 
Fall and Spring Semester Meal Plans 
AY 2021 - 2022 Recommendation 
 
 
 
 
Semester Meal Plans 
  
 
Dining Dollars 
  
Cost Per Plan AY 2021-22 
  
 
Total AY22 Rate 
  
 
Cost per Semester 
  
$ Increase from Prior AY 
 % 
Increase from Prior AY 
 
Traditional 19 
 $500 
 $5,068 
 $5,568 
 $2,784 
 $218 
 4.07% 
 
Traditional 14 
 $600 
 $4,778 
 $5,378 
 $2,689 
 $228 
 4.43% 
 
170 Block 
 $750 
 $4,498 
 $5,248 
 $2,624 
 $198 
 3.92% 
 
140 Block 
 $800 
 $4,400 
 $5,200 
 $2,600 
 $150 
 2.97% 
 
75 Block 
 $900 
 $1,670 
 $2,570 
 $1,285 
 $70 
 2.80% 
 
Dining Dollars Only 
 $2,250 
 $0 
 $2,250 
 $1,125 
 $100 
 4.65% 
 
Dining Dollar Add-On Option 
 $50 
  
  
  
  
  
 

Average Increase                                                                                                              3.82% 
Summer Semester Meal Plans 
Summer 2022 Recommendation 
 
 
 
 
Summer Meal Plans 
  
 
Dining Dollars 
  
Cost Per Plan AY 2021-22 
  
 
Total AY22Rate 
  
 
Cost per Semester 
  
$ Increase from Prior AY 
 % 
Increase from Prior AY 
 
Block 25 
 $200 
 $235 
 $435 
 $435 
 $10 
 2.35% 
 
Block 50 
 $100 
 $475 
 $575 
 $575 
 $20 
 3.60% 
 
Summer 14 
 $0 
 $660 
 $660 
 $660 
 $30 
 4.76% 
 
Dining Dollar Add-On Option 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 

 Average Increase                                                                                                                3.59% 

Academic Advising & Policies 
Academic Advisement 
Students enrolled in all undergraduate schools and colleges are assigned faculty or staff advisors to assist them in planning and following a sound program of study. Students are encouraged to contact their advisor on any matters related to their educational programs. The role of the academic advisor goes beyond providing assistance to students in selecting and scheduling classes. The scope of the advisor’s responsibility typically includes any areas that affect or are related to academic success, such as goal-setting, career planning, academic issues, personal concerns, financial support, and general guidance to facilitate personal growth. Students who have not selected a major should contact the Office of Undergraduate Studies for a consultation. 

Registration 
All students must register for classes during the periods announced in the official University Calendar. Students who fail to register will not be permitted to attend classes, and their names will not appear on official class lists. BisonWeb is the official self-service portal that all students will use to register for their courses each semester. Directions on how to register are available on the BisonWeb webpage at http://www.howard.edu/bisonweb/. 
Intra-University Transfers 
(FOR CURRENTLY ENROLLED UNDERGRADUATE STUDENTS ONLY) 
1. 
Student obtains Intra-University Transfer Form from the Dean’s Office of the School/College to which he/she is transferring. 

2. 
Upon receipt of this application, the Dean of the College/ School receiving the transferee will obtain any information needed from the College/School from which the applicant is transferring and determine whether the student qualifies for transfer. 

3. 
The Dean’s Office will forward the approved form to the Office of the Registrar. 

4. 
All applications for Intra-University transfers must be completed and “approved” by appropriate officials before submission. They must be received in the Office of the Registrar by the first day of classes of the semester. 


Alternate PIN 
All continuing students require an Alternate PIN to register, with the exception of graduate students in the School of Business and the College of Nursing and Allied Health. Students must meet with their academic advisors in their School or College to obtain their Alternate Pin. 
Course Waitlist 
When a section of a course fills to the enrollment limit, students attempting to register through BisonWeb will receive a registration error message that a waitlist exists. The student will then be given the option of adding themselves to the waitlist for the course. If a student already enrolled in the course should drop, that seat will not become available for registration through BisonWeb if there is an active waitlist for the course. Obtaining a space on a waitlist should not be interpreted as a guarantee of getting a seat in the course. 
Students must attempt to register for the course via BisonWeb in order to be offered the waitlist option. When a seat becomes available, the first student on the waitlist will receive an email notification to their preferred email address (students can confirm their preferred email address on BisonWeb) when a seat becomes available. A student will have 24 hours from the time of the email to register for the class through BisonWeb, between the hours of 9AM and midnight each day. It is the student's responsibility to check their preferred email once on a waitlist. If they do not register for the class during that time period, the seat will be offered to the next student on the waitlist. Students MUST have an email address on file or they will not receive the notification and lose their opportunity to register. 
BisonWeb Registration Errors 
When attempting to register for courses via BisonWeb students may encounter errors that prevent registration. Restrictions have been applied to courses for various academic and administrative reasons. Please see the following registration error messages: 
Course Waitlist 
When a section of a course fills to the enrollment limit, students attempting to register through BisonWeb will receive a registration error message that a waitlist exists. The student will then be given the option of adding themselves to the waitlist for the course. If a student already enrolled in the course should drop, that seat will not become available for registration through BisonWeb if there is an active waitlist for the course. Obtaining a space on a waitlist should not be interpreted as a guarantee of getting a seat in the course. 
Course Overrides 
The course override capability exists for the sole purpose of accommodating those relatively few students who are given permission to either (a) enroll in a class that is “closed,” or (b) enroll in one or more classes that have reasonable time conflicts within the student’s schedule. Course overrides must be approved by the person(s) designated by course instructor and the Dean or his/her designee of the respective School/College in accordance with procedure(s) established by such School/College/Division. 

General Academic Information 
Definition of a Credit Hour 
In accord with federal regulations, a credit hour is an amount of work represented in intended learning outcomes and verified by evidence of student achievement that is an institutionally established equivalency that reasonably approximates: Not less than one hour of classroom or direct faculty instruction and a minimum of two hours out of class student work each week for approximately fifteen weeks for one semester; At least an equivalent amount of work as outlined in item 1 above for other academic activities as established by the institution including laboratory work, internships, practica, studio work, and other academic work leading to the award of credit hours. 
Credit or credit hour 
A unit of measure representing the equivalent of an hour (50 minutes) of instruction per week over the entire term. It is applied toward the total number of credit hours needed for completing the requirements for a degree, diploma or certificate, or another award.) 
Curriculum Review 
The Curriculum Committees and Deans of each School or College are charged with following the policy on credit hours in their review and approval of all courses and for certifying that the expected student learning for the course meets the credit hour standard. The determination of credit hours is made when a new course or a revision to an existing course is proposed. The submitted syllabus is examined for contact time as well as for assignments and evaluation mechanisms. 
Examinations 
The number of examinations administered in a course varies according to the method of instruction. Where midterm examinations are scheduled, they are given near the middle of each course. Final examinations are held at the end of each semester and are a required part of each course in most schools and colleges. For additional information and exceptions to the above, students should consult the individual schools and colleges. 
Classification of Students 
The number of credits which each student has accumulated determines that student’s classification. Students who have received a score of three or higher on any of the Advanced Placement Examinations of the College Board will be eligible, in the area of each examination, for advanced placement and credit toward graduation as determined by the appropriate department. They will also qualify for exemption from certain general education courses as specified by the dean on the basis of the student's total record. Students may not receive credit toward graduation for Howard University courses that are equivalent to courses for which they have received advanced placement credit. All other advanced standing is determined by the individual schools and colleges within Howard University. 
Major 
A major sequence of study is a series of courses prescribed by a given department as necessary for a concentration in that department. A major ordinarily includes 30 to 39 credits earned in a single department or in closely related departments. 
Minor 
A minor sequence of study is a combination of courses intended to broaden students’ perspectives and buttress their major areas of concentration. A minor generally consists of 15 to 18 credits earned in one or more areas outside of the student’s major department. 
Elective 
An elective is a course which students may choose to take for credit toward earning their degrees. 
Grading System 
Except where indicated otherwise in school/college bulletins, the following grading system is used at Howard University: A—excellent scholarship, 90 and above; B—good, 80 to 89; C—fair, 70 to 79; D— poor, 60 to 69; F—failure, below 60; W—withdrawal, has no grade value and is, therefore, not calculated in the term of cumulative grade point average; I—incomplete. A grade of D cannot be raised to a higher grade by re-examination. Required courses in which students receive failing grades must be repeated. 
Grade Point Average (GPA) 
The grade point average is determined by multiplying the number of credit hours of the course by the point value of the grade received for the course (A, 4; B, 3; C, 2; D, 1; F, O; W not calculated). The resulting products (quality points) are then summed and divided by the total number of credit hours. The grade point average is computed for all courses attempted, excluding courses repeated. 
Program of Study 
Effective Fall 2013, a total of 120 credits are required for the baccalaureate degree*. The typical program includes a major field (21-78 credits), a minor field (12 - 39 credits), a core group of general education studies, and electives. The specific details of the general education requirement vary among the schools. * Specialized programs in studio art and architecture have additional credit hour requirements. 
Afro-American Studies Requirement 
All undergraduate students are required to complete at least one course in Afro-American studies. Courses which satisfy this requirement are offered by several departments. 
Residency Requirement 
The majority of the individual schools and colleges at Howard University require that students spend the last 30 credit hours of undergraduate study in residence at the University in the school or college in which the degree is awarded. 
GPA Requirement for Graduation 
To receive a Bachelor of Arts or Bachelor of Science degree, students must have a cumulative grade point average of at least 2.0 on a 4.0 scale. Additional grade requirements are determined by degreegranting School or College. 
Honors 
Students will be graduated with honors under the following conditions: those with a cumulative grade point average (GPA) ranging from 3.20 through 3.49 will be graduated cum laude; those with a cumulative GPA ranging from 3.50 through 3.79 will be graduated magna cum laude, and those with a cumulative GPA of 3.80 or higher will be graduated summa cum laude. 
Grades in noncredit courses are not considered in determining eligibility for honors. Although the policy varies according to the individual schools and colleges within the University, generally students are not eligible to receive these distinctions at graduation if they have not completed the last half of the work required for their degree in residence at Howard; if they have repeated courses to raise their GPA; or if they have not carried at least 12 credits for each semester enrolled, with the exception of the last semester in residence. 
Students who have excelled academically are honored by having their names placed on the Dean’s Honor Roll. Generally, this honor roll is published annually and includes honor students from the preceding school year. The GPA required differs among the schools and colleges according to their specific policies. 
Time Limitation 
There is no strict regulation with respect to the total amount of time in which undergraduate students must fulfill their degree requirements, provided they maintain an appropriate grade point average and give evidence of being seriously interested in the eventual achievement of their academic objectives. 
Attendance 
All students are expected to attend classes regularly and promptly. Students who are absent from classes are held responsible, nevertheless, for the entire work of the course. Members of the faculty will hold students responsible for regular and prompt class attendance. Any student who does not take a scheduled midterm or final examination must obtain the approval of his instructor in order to take a 69 substitute examination. A student who does not secure such approval will receive a grade of zero for the examination missed. 

Semester Grades 
At the end of each semester, semester grades are available to students via the BisonWeb. Semester grades will be mailed to parents when authorized by the student. 

Satisfactory Academic Progress Policy 
Three components of your academic record determine whether you are maintaining satisfactory academic progress: (1) course completion, (2) grade point average (GPA) and (3) maximum eligibility. The requirements in each area vary according to your status as an undergraduate, graduate or professional student, your school/college of enrollment, and your enrollment status (full-time, halftime, or less than-half-time). This federal policy affects your eligibility for all forms of assistance, including but not limited to, the following aid programs: 
1. 
Federal: Federal Work-Study, Federal Pell Grant, Federal Perkins Loan, Federal Direct PLUS Loan (Parent loan), Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant (SEOG), Graduate PLUS Loans, Federal Family Education Loan Program, Federal Direct Loan Program (Subsidized and Unsubsidized), Nursing Student Loans and Health Professions Loans and Grants 

2. 
State: All State eligible programs, Alternate Loan Programs (that do not consider SAP to be a criterion), and Student Educational Loan Fund. 

3. 
Institutional: Departmental scholarships/grants, Howard University Student Employment Program (HUSEP), Graduate Remission or Assistantships. 

4. 
Private Loans: Students on SAP may only apply for private loans that do not seek a student's academic progression (or lack thereof) a necessary criterion. This is often done by conducting an internet search. 


Satisfactory Academic Progress will now be evaluated on a per semester basis. It will no longer be evaluated on an annual basis. Once a student finds themselves as being on 'financial aid suspension' per email notification and by checking their BisonWeb account, they then are to initiate the appeal process. Once an appeal has been received, reviewed, and approved by members of the office's Professional Judgment Committee, students must also submit an Academic Plan (AP) to be electronically signed and acknowledged by their major advisor. The AP must have the advisor's signature on it to confirm they have approved the courses a student plans to take and successfully pass in the upcoming semester. 
If AP's are not received within a timely manner, this will subsequently affect the disbursement of a student's aid for that particular semester. If a student changes their classes (by adding or dropping) within the same semester, they must resubmit their AP to the Office of Financial Aid noting the necessary changes and their academic advisor must e-sign those changes. At the conclusion of each semester, a student's performance will be assessed on the following criteria: 
Completion Ratio 
Your enrollment status is reviewed at the conclusion of each academic semester (fall and spring) to verify that you have earned the required minimum number of credits during fall and spring semesters. You are required to complete at least 70% of all attempted hours of coursework each academic semester. (E.g. If a student registers for 15 credit hours in the fall semester; 5 (3 credit) courses, they must pass each course with a letter grade of "C" or better.) Grades or indicators of ‘F’ (Fail), ‘I’ (Incomplete), ‘U’ (Unsatisfactory), ‘UW’ (Unofficial Withdrawal), ‘NR’ (Never Reported) all count against your completion ratio. Repeated coursework may not be used in the calculation of your completion ratio and is not covered by financial aid. 
Cumulative Grade Point Average (GPA) 
As an undergraduate student, your per semester grade point average (GPA) will be reviewed. Freshmen students with a GPA lower than 2.0 at the conclusion of the fall semester will be placed on Financial Aid Probation. Regardless of the program of study, students who do not meet the required minimum GPA requirements (or academic standards) of the program are automatically SAP suspended. 
Maximum Eligibility 
A student will maintain financial aid eligibility for a specified period of time. Undergraduate students must complete their chosen academic program within 150 percent of the number of credit hours required for graduation or successful completion. (For example, an undergraduate student may attempt a maximum of 191 credit hours for a program requiring 127 hours for graduation.) Undergraduate students will be notified when they are within 24 credit hours of reaching the expiration of their financial aid eligibility. Students must continue their studies at their expense they have reached their maximum eligibility. 
Financial Aid Probation 
If at the end of the semester a student is listed as being on PROBATION of any kind (e.g. Probation for Credits, Probation for Grades and Probation for Grades/Credits), the student is still eligible to receive aid for the next semester. A student’s probationary status is a warning that he or she must meet all SAP criteria for any subsequent terms of attendance in order to maintain financial aid eligibility. A student does not do not need to appeal this status in order to receive aid. Financial aid probation will occur for a student’s next academic semester of attendance if he or she fails to earn the minimum number of credits and/or the GPA required. Such students may continue to receive financial aid while on financial aid probation. 
Types of Financial Aid Suspension 
Your financial aid eligibility will be suspended if you fail to earn the necessary credits or achieve the required GPA while on financial aid probation. At that time, you will no longer be eligible to receive financial aid to attend Howard University. To reinstate your financial aid eligibility, you must appeal to the Office of Financial Aid by the proposed deadline per semester. If a student's appeal is denied for whatever reason, they then may re-enroll and successfully complete the courses they have registered for at their own expense, at least for one semester. At the conclusion of that particular semester, students may then re-appeal to the Office of Financial Aid explaining in a detailed type-written narrative to then request to have their aid reinstated. Students cannot receive financial aid if they do not meet the necessary criteria. Students who have been suspended consecutively will be ineligible for aid reinstatement until they have covered the courses they have registered for at their own expense. Students are more than welcome to seek other sources of funding that include alternative loans that do not consider SAP to be a criterion. 
Academic Suspension 
You are not eligible to receive financial aid if you have been de-matriculated (academically suspended) from the University. When you have been readmitted by the University; a process students must complete with the Office of Admission, as a Former Student Returning, youmust complete the SAP appeal process. Your financial aid eligibility status will be determined based on the SAP criteria and a thorough a review of your academic transcript. 
Exclusions 
The following types of registration and grades cannot be used to fulfill probation, suspension or rematriculation requirements: credits by special exam, Advanced Placement or CLEP exams, distance education or correspondence courses for which you have not obtained prior approval, audit, withdrawal, incomplete and zero credit courses. 
Appeal Process 
You may appeal a financial aid suspension status by submitting a completed appeal packet to the Office of Financial Aid within 14 calendar days from the date of your notification. It is the responsibility of the student to follow up with their advisor as often as possible, throughout the semester, by checking their BisonWeb account for updates by checking their financial aid eligibility from one semester to the next, as well as their personal preferred email address for emails on pertinent deadlines and updates. 
Types of suspension that CAN BE appealed by the appropriate deadline: 
1. 
Suspension from the University - Student is academically suspended from the University.* 

2. 
Suspension for Credits - Student did not earn at least 70% of the credit hours attempted in the previous two (2) academic years. 

3. 
Suspension for Grades** - Student did not earn minimum GPA required for ‘good standing‘ for previous two (2) years. 


Types of suspension that CANNOT be appealed: 
1. 
 4 Year Undergraduate Suspension - Student has met or exceeded maximum degree timeframe (1.5 times the total minimum credit hours required for degree). 

2. 
5 Year Undergraduate Suspension - Student has met or exceeded maximum degree timeframe (1.5 times the total minimum credit hours required for degree) OR has more than 12 hours of incomplete credits. 


SAP Appeal forms are available to suspended students via BisonWeb. 
If you have failed to achieve SAP (Satisfactory Academic Progress) because of mitigating circumstances, your appeal packet must consist of the following: 
1. 
SAP appeal form with type of suspension indicated per your BisonWeb account 

2. 
Detailed type-written narrative of what led to your suspension status, and explanation of what you intend to do to improve your plan of action, and 

3. 
Copies of all supporting documentation attached. 


Once your appeal has been received and reviewed by the Appeals Committee, you will receive written notification of the committee's decision by email to the address you have provided in your appeal packet. You will also notice the appropriate changes made to your award package on your BisonWeb account. Note: All incomplete appeals will be denied. All appeal decisions are final and the submission of a SAP appeal does not guarantee reinstatement of aid eligibility. Students who are currently SAP suspended are strongly advised to create alternate financial plans in the event your appeal is denied. 
Additional SAP Requirements 
If you are listed as being SUSPENDED FROM THE UNIVERSITY, the appeal process is two-fold. 
Step 1: You must appeal to your school/college as well as Step 2: the Office of Financial Aid. It is your responsibility to stay abreast of deadlines. Stipulation letters do not ensure financial aid reinstatement and one is not contingent upon the other. For further inquiries please contact the Office of Financial Aid at: http://www.howard.edu/financialaid/contacts/staff-finaid.htm 
1. 
Although you may not be receiving financial aid, you will be evaluated for financial aid eligibility on the same basis as students who receive federal and state aid. Should you apply for aid, your eligibility will be based on your prior academic performance at Howard University. 

2. 
If you are enrolled in a dual degree program, you may appeal for an extension of the maximum time frame provision of this policy. 

3. 
If you are an undergraduate student pursuing a second degree, you may attempt an additional 48 credit hours to complete your second degree program, including prerequisite courses. Graduate/professional students may attempt an additional 24 credit hours. 

4. 
If you are a transfer student, your maximum eligibility will be reduced by the number of transfer credits accepted by Howard University. 

5. 
Credits you have earned at foreign institutions will be included in your SAP evaluation provided they are applicable to the degree/program sought. 

6. 
Courses in which you receive a grade of ‘I’(incomplete) accompanied by a letter grade will be considered when evaluating your completion ratio, and will influence your term and cumulative GPA. All attempted and earned credits are considered in maximum eligibility determination. 

7. 
Courses in which you receive a grade of ‘W’ (withdrawal) do not earn credits or affect your GPA, but they will be considered when evaluating your maximum eligibility. You may retake courses from which you withdraw and those credits will count toward determining your enrollment status and completion ratio, provided you have not earned credit for the same course. 

8. 
If you are enrolled in undergraduate remedial courses, credits attempted/earned will count toward determining your enrollment status, minimum credits earned and maximum eligibility. 

9. 
If you take undergraduate courses while you are a graduate student, courses that are satisfactorily completed do not earn graduate credit or influence your graduate GPA, nor will they count toward determining your enrollment status or minimum credits earned at the graduate level. 

10. 
All undergraduate and prerequisite courses are evaluated in SAP Maximum Eligibility. 

11. 
If you are taking courses to earn professional licensure, you must be admitted to a degree program in order to receive financial aid. Students completing licensure courses and are not seeking a bachelor's, master's, or doctoral degree are not eligible for financial aid. 

12. 
The credits earned from repeated courses will count toward the determining your enrollment status and maximum eligibility. However, for purposes of financial aid satisfactory academic progress, only credits adding to the cumulative credits earned will be acceptable toward the required minimum number of credits earned per year. 

13. 
If you attend a summer session and wish those credits/grades to be considered with your fall and spring total, you must complete the appeal process at the end of the summer term. Summer credits will count toward determining your maximum eligibility. 



Course Repeat Policy 
An undergraduate student may repeat only once a course for which he/she has received a grade of “D” or “F”. The lower grade will not be counted in the computation of the GPA. Exceptions to repeating a course more than once will be made only if it is a major or minor requirement for which the minimum grade of “C” is required, or if a student is ineligible to advance to the next level without a passing grade. All subsequent repeats, after the first one, will be counted in computing the GPA. 
In all course repeats, the failing or previous grade is not expunged from the academic record. Students are not eligible to graduate with honors if they have repeated a course(s); they have not carried at least 12 credits for each semester enrolled, with the exception of the last semester in residence, and they have not completed the last half of the work required for their degree in residence at Howard University. SPECIAL NOTE: In all cases of course repeats the failing or previous grade is NOT expunged from the academic record. 

Change of Program: Audit, Variable Course Credits, Pass/Fail 
Students who wish to change courses to audit or to increase the credits on a variable course must complete a change of program form. Signatures of approval of the academic dean and the course instructor must be obtained. The last day to add and/or drop courses is published every semester in the University calendar. 
If a student is enrolled in a course for audit or pass/fail and wishes to change to credit, that student must drop the course for audit or pass/fail and add the course for credit. The last day for such a change is published every semester in the University calendar. 
Failure to comply with this change of program procedure may result in a failing grade for courses students have assumed they have dropped or no grade for courses they thought they added. All changes must be made in accordance with the established deadlines. 

Note on Credit Hours and Special Topics Courses 
Note on Credit Hours 
Please note courses with a range of credit hours will be charged per credit hour as appropriate. 
Note on Special Topics Courses 
Course descriptions are static descriptions of courses to ensure that subject matter is consistent across semesters for a given course. Course descriptions are written by faculty and approved by academic leadership. Course descriptions are by design difficult to change. However, as a research university, Howard University has the responsibility to adjust some course material to the changing fields and changing disciplines. Howard, like most universities, has instituted special topics courses to allow a curricular flexibility that both allows for the introduction of new knowledge and protects the concrete nature of other courses. As the topics faculty (or in the case of honors courses, students) choose cannot be predicted a full year in advance, the exact subject matter to be discussed in a special topics course is understandably not included in the course catalog. Students interested in taking courses that suggest a varied or selected subject matter should contact the department chair or the instructor of the course. 
Special topics courses can be repeated by students in some disciplines if the subject matter differs. For students who choose to take multiple special topics courses who need evidence of the unique subject matter of each course, this can be found in their course syllabi. Students seeking funding that requires courses not to be repeated may be asked to provide their syllabi before funding is given. As an example, students receiving military educational benefits would need to provide syllabi for courses that have the same course number and/or course description. 
Please note that instead of differing section numbers for one special topics class, some departments choose to offer multiple courses that are designated as "Special Topics" courses. 
The same syllabi requirements would be required for students enrolled in more than one of these courses as part of their degree. 

Pass/Fail Regulation 
Sophomores, juniors, and seniors with a cumulative average of 2.0 or higher who enroll in at least 12 semester hours per semester, may elect to enroll in one course per semester on a pass/fail basis. This pass/fail option is restricted to electives exclusively and is not permitted for courses that fulfill major and minor course requirements. Students will receive a passing designation if his/her work in the course rates as “D” or better and a failing designation if his/her work in the course rates below “D”. Except for students in the School of Business, courses passed under the pass/fail system will count towards graduation requirements. FAILING GRADES WILL BE INDICATED ON THE ACADEMIC RECORD; however, neither the passing grade nor failing grade will be computed in the grade point average. Students electing to take a course pass/fail cannot later petition to receive a grade in the course. Until further notice the Pass/Fail Regulation is on an experimental basis and is reviewed annually. 

Change of Program Fee 
All charges for change of program that affect your enrollment status must be paid to avoid late charges. Students officially withdrawing, suspended, dropped, or decreasing or increasing their credit hours after the registration period may expect to have charges for tuition and fees adjusted on a prorated basis. 

Withdrawal From a Course 
The last day to withdraw from a course is published in the University Calendar. Withdrawals are not permitted later than 4 weeks prior to the end of the semester, including the final examination period. A student may withdraw from a course up to 8 weeks after the first day of instruction and receive a grade of “W” (withdrawal). Seniors, juniors, sophomores and graduate students without registration holds complete course withdrawals on BisonWeb. Freshmen and students with holds that prevent registration will need to complete a Change of Program form and obtain a signature from your academic advisor. Please see your academic department for this form. Change of Program Forms may be obtained from the Office of Undergraduate Studies or the Office of the Academic Dean of each school/college. 
Mere absence from class does not constitute withdrawal. A properly executed Change of Program Form, Total Withdrawal Form or BisonWeb process must be used to effectuate all drops, withdrawals, adds, section changes, or course enrollment status changes. Students will receive a failing grade for courses in which they discontinue attendance without completing the required withdrawal process. 

Warning on Dropping Courses 
Students who wish to drop all courses for which they have registered (even though they may be taking only one course) must submit a Total Withdrawal form to officially drop all courses in which currently enrolled. (In this instance, the drop/add procedure should not be used.) 

All Incomplete Grades 
(other than grades for Thesis & Research) must be completed by the student no later than the last day of classes of the next semester of enrollment. Instructors must submit Special Grade Reports for removing incomplete grades by the last day of the semester. 

Removal of Incomplete Grades 
Students for whom an incomplete grade has been reported must remove the incomplete grade prior to the last day of classes the next semester in which the student is enrolled, unless the student requests, and is granted, an extension. Failure to meet this deadline will result in the incomplete grade becoming a permanent grade. A request for an extension should be made to the dean of the College, in writing, at least 10 days before the last day of classes. 

Academic Suspension 
Any student who fails to remove his/her probationary status within one semester, exclusive of summer sessions, will be suspended. Official notification of suspension will be sent from the Office of the Registrar. 
A one-semester extension of the probationary period may be requested by appealing in writing to the Dean of the School or College no later than 60 days prior to the first day of classes for the fall semester and 15 days prior to the first day of classes for the spring semester. 
If the appeal is granted, the student will be required to follow specific stipulations during the extension period. If the appeal is denied, the student is not eligible for readmission for at least one semester. 

Readmission Policy on Academic Probation & Suspension 
A student enrolled in any of the undergraduate schools and colleges whose cumulative grade point average is less than 2.0 at the end of the first semester or any subsequent semester will incur academic probation. Students who have achieved junior status or are in the professional phase of the following programs will incur probation if their cumulative grade point average falls below 2.5 in the School of Education, The College of Pharmacy, and The College of Nursing and Allied Health Sciences. 
Regulations Governing Students on Probation 
Students on probation must adhere to the following conditions for continued enrollment: Enroll in a maximum of 13 credit hours if full-time, and seven hours if part-time. Establish and maintain contact with their designated school/college advisor (Dean, faculty advisor, advisory center, or student services unit) for academic advising, counseling, assistance, and referral to support services at least once per month. Probationary status will be removed when the student has achieved a cumulative average of at least 2.0. Probationary status must be removed within one semester, exclusive of summer sessions, or the student will incur a suspension. Any student who voluntarily withdraws from the University while on probation will be subject to stipulations as a condition for readmission. 

Readmission After Academic Suspension 
Requests for readmission must be initiated by submitting to the Office of Admission, at least 60 days prior to the registration period, an application for admission and, a completed petition for readmission to the school or college in which the student was last enrolled. 
The request should include a description of the student’s activities during the suspension period, the steps that have been taken to ensure success if the request is approved, and appropriate supporting documentation. 
Requests for readmission will be reviewed by the appropriate designee of the school of last attendance and an admission committee, which will render a decision based on the student’s previous academic record, contents of the request for readmission, and other relevant factors. 
Upon readmission after suspension, students must adhere to the conditions outlined below. Failure to meet these stipulations will result in automatic suspension from the University. 
The student shall establish and maintain contact (at least once per month) with designated school/college advisor (Dean, faculty advisor, advisory center, or student services unit) for academic advising, counseling, assistance, and referral to support services. 
The student shall enroll in appropriate courses in the Center for Academic Reinforcement and/or other support programs as stipulated by the admission committee. 
Enroll in a maximum of 13 credit hours if full-time, and seven credit hours if part-time, until the cumulative grade point average meets the requirement for removal of probation. 
Remove all deficiencies during the next semester of enrollment (or the next semester when the courses are offered) before proceeding with the published program for their degree. 
Earn a minimum grade of C in each course or earn the required grade point average stipulated by the admission committee until the cumulative grade point average meets the requirements for the removal of probation. 
Failure to meet the above conditions may result in academic suspension. 
GRADE POINTS &GRADE POINT AVERAGE (GPA) 
The grade point value is determined by multiplying the number of credits (also called hours) a course yields by the grade received for the course. Grades yield points as follows: A = 4; B = 3; C = 2; D = 1; F = 0; W, AD, P, S, U, and UW (not calculated). 
The semester grade point average (GPA) is obtained by dividing the number of semester grade points earned by the number of credits attempted for the semester. For example, a student attempts five courses totaling 13 credits for the semester, and receives grades as follows: 
Course 1 (3 credits) — “A” Course 2 (3 credits) — “B” Course 3 (2 credits) — “B” Course 4 (1 credit) — “C” Course 5 (4 credits) — “D” 
Total semester grade points earned for courses 1 through 5 are respectively: (3 x 4) + (3 x 3) + (2 x 3) + (1 x 2) + (4 x 1) = (12 + 9 + 6 + 2 + 4) = 33. Semester GPA = 33 ÷ 13 = 2.54. 
The cumulative (or overall) GPA is determined by dividing the number of cumulative (or total) grade points earned at Howard University (including grade points for the most recent grading period) by the cumulative (i.e., total) number of credits attempted at Howard University. For example, a student who has previously attempted 65 credits at Howard University and earned 160-grade points with an old cumulative GPA of 160 ÷ 65 = 2.46. The new cumulative number of credits attempted at Howard University = 65 + 13 = 78; and the new cumulative grade points earned = 160 + 33 = 193. The new cumulative GPA = 193 ÷ 78 = 2.47. 
The grade point average is computed for all courses not officially canceled that have been taken and/or repeated in the student’s program of study. 

Attendance 
All officially enrolled students are expected to attend classes regularly and promptly. Students who are absent from classes or laboratory periods are still responsible for completing course requirements. Students with extenuating circumstances that prohibit their adherence to the course calendar may seek permission from their instructors to complete outstanding course requirements, examinations, etc. Students who neglect to seek permission or whose requests are denied will receive the grade earned as determined by the course instructor. 

Total Withdrawal Procedure 
Students who find it necessary to withdraw from all of their classes for the current semester or for a subsequent semester for which they have already registered must complete a Total Withdrawal Request Form. This form must be submitted by the end of the 12th week of classes for the semester in which they wish to withdraw. The withdrawal form and instructions are available from the Dean or Advisory Center of each school or college. Students who are physically unable to complete the withdrawal in person and students who are administratively withdrawn should contact their dean or advisor for assistance. Students considering a total withdrawal should note the following: 
The effective date of the withdrawal will be the date on which Office of the Registrar receives the completed withdrawal request form. 
By registering for courses, students accept financial responsibility for payment for those courses and for any other charges incurred while they are enrolled. 
Financial aid may be adjusted or canceled as a result of withdrawal and may require repayment of loan funds. Adjustments to financial aid awards will be calculated according to University and Federal refund guidelines based on the official withdrawal date. 
Once the withdrawal has been completed, students will receive a grade of “W” for each course if the withdrawal is submitted after the Change of Program period. 
Students who reside in University housing are required to check out of their residence hall within 24 hours of completing the total withdrawal process. 
Completing a total withdrawal from the University requires that students surrender all University property, including, but not limited to library books, room keys, computer cards, and identification/access cards. 
Students who complete a total withdrawal from the University must reapply for admission to the University by published application deadlines. 
Students who wish to complete the Total Withdrawal Process should follow the steps listed below. 
Access the Total Withdrawal Process via http://www.howard.edu/enrollment/registration/withdrawal.htm 
Enter your name and preferred e-mail address as well as the Howard issued e-mail address for the appropriate offices. Please see total withdrawal contact. 
The system will automatically generate an access code and forward the access code to your email account. Enter that access code to continue. 
Read and verify the terms and conditions, then select review document. Complete all required fields highlighted in red. Once all the required fields are complete, please select confirm signing on the left side of the document. Once you have confirm signing, your request will be routed to the appropriate offices, Please note there is an optional save feature that allows you to check the status of your request. 
Students who register during General Registration for the upcoming semester and determine before the beginning of that semester that they will not be returning, must complete a Total Withdrawal Form for that upcoming semester. The signature of the Dean or Dean’s designee is required. The Office of the Registrar (located in Suite 104 in the Administration Building) is the last office to sign the Total Withdrawal Form. 
If you need to make the effective date of your Total Withdrawal prior to the date you actually begin the process, due to extenuating circumstances; you must get special approval to do so. The first step is to visit the office of the Dean or academic advising center of your school or college. You should take with you documentation to support your request (e.g., a letter from your doctor). If the request is supported by your school or college, it will be forwarded to the Office of the Registrar to be considered for approval. 

Readmission After a Total Withdrawal 
Undergraduate students who complete a total withdrawal and wish to return to Howard University after an absence of one semester or more are required to apply for readmission (no Application Fee or Enrollment Fee is required). 
NOTE: Any withdrawing student planning to return for the semester immediately following the withdrawal must check with the Office of Admission for information regarding re-enrollment. For further general information on Total Withdrawal, contact the Dean of your school/college. 

Student Resources & Services 
Photo Identification Cards 
Student photo ID cards are issued by the BisonOne Card Office to incoming students (i.e., New Students, Transfer Students, and Former Students Returning) during the official registration period for a given semester. Each officially enrolled Howard University student is expected to maintain continuous possession of his/her photo ID card throughout his/her period of attendance at the University. 
Replacement of photo ID cards that are lost, stolen, or damaged, may be obtained at the I-Lab Photo ID room located at the Bryant Street side entrance of 2301 Georgia Avenue. In order to secure a replacement ID, students must pay a $25.00 fee and present an acceptable photo ID. 

BisonWeb 
BisonWeb (http://www.howard.edu/bisonweb/) is the official self-service portal that all students should use to review student accounts and financial aid; course registration each semester; academic records; and apply for graduation. 
Contact Information Requirement 
Upon enrollment students must report all appropriate addresses via BisonWeb. Grades, material for registration, and other materials will be mailed periodically to the student’s local address. Failure to maintain a current address with the Office of Enrollment Management/Records may not be used as an excuse to avoid late registration fees or discharge. 

Certification of Enrollment 
Certifications consist of written verification of a variety of student enrollment-related data such as date(s) of attendance full-time/part-time status, and degree(s) received. Currently enrolled and former students can access BisonWeb for an Enrollment Verification Certificate. Some certifications may be furnished directly to various individuals or agencies such as prospective employers, official investigators, lending institutions, or government agencies. Howard University has authorized the National Student Clearinghouse to provide enrollment information for such requests. The National Student Clearinghouse can be contacted at: 
Web: www.degreeverify.org. 
Mail: National Student Clearinghouse 2300 Dulles Station Boulevard, Suite 300 Herndon, VA 20171 
In all such cases, the information released about students shall satisfy the provisions of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 and University policy. 

Transcripts 
Academic transcripts are issued by the Office of the Registrar, which is the University-designated office for maintaining official academic records of all students currently or previously enrolled. Students are encouraged to use BisonWeb to request transcripts and pay the $5.00 fee with a credit card online. Students who are unable to use BisonWeb to request a transcript may submit a request in writing. Written requests for transcripts will be honored only if the following conditions are met: requests must contain the written SIGNATURE OF THE STUDENT OR FORMER STUDENT whose record is being requested; student must be CLEARED FINANCIALLY (have no “holds” on account especially holds by Student Financial Services request must contain HU identification number or other information to allow us to identify the record (e.g. social security number, date of birth) in cases where the student does not remember the identification number; and the request must be accompanied by a $5.00 fee by check or money order to Howard University. 
Students who wish to review their grades or their complete academic record can do so via BisonWeb and print out semester reports of their entire record. All transcript requests will be honored as expeditiously as possible (usually processed within 24 hours of receipt in the Office of the Registrar). Transcript requests that must be accompanied by special forms to be completed by schools for licensing or other accrediting agencies, will also require greater turnaround time to process. Please plan accordingly to allow sufficient time to meet your individual needs. Transcripts requested for “pick up” at the service window will be held for 30 days only. After 30 days, students will need to submit a new request and fee. See the Office of the Registrar website for information on additional policies that may apply. 
Academic transcripts issued by the Office of the Registrar reflects, in chronological order, the COMPLETE and UNABRIDGED history of ALL academic endeavors attempted and/or earned by the student. “Partial” transcripts are not furnished. 

The Office of Undergraduate Studies 
The mission of Office of Undergraduate Studies is to facilitate the successful matriculation of undergraduate students by offering academic support services and programs that will result in improved persistence, retention, and graduation rates. Specific services include: 
Academic advising and retention counseling Graduation clearance and degree completion support Academic policy and petition guidance Academic support courses, workshops, and services Professional development opportunities for staff and faculty advisers Honors and scholar development programs Academic mentoring New student orientation Transfer student support services Comprehensive career services 

The University Counseling Service 
The University Counseling Service has a staff of professionally trained counselors and psychologists available to assist students with their concerns. The UCS offers educational, career, and personal counseling on either an individual or group basis. Services are at no cost to all registered students — regardless of college or school in which the student is enrolled. 
The University Counseling Service is located in the C.B. Powell Building Wing 1, Ground and First Floors. Students are welcome to call for an appointment or to drop in for a visit between 8:00 am and 6:00 pm, Monday through Friday. For further inquiries on the University Counseling Service, please call (202) 806-6870. 

Various Student Services and Support 
DISABILITY SUPPORT SERVICES 
https://studentaffairs.howard.edu/diversity-incluison/disability-services 
The Office of Student Services works to ensure students with disabilities are provided equal access to university programs, activities and services by determining reasonable accommodations as appropriate. To learn about available services and the process for requesting such, please visit our website or send email to oss.disabilityservices@howard.edu or call 202-238-2420 
MILITARY AND VETERANS’ SERVICES (OMVS) 
 
https://studentaffairs.howard.edu/OMVS 
The Military and Veterans Services Office (OMVS) provides support for all military-connected students and their families including veterans/prior service, active duty, reservists, National Guard, ROTC, retirees, spouses and children in their educational goals, while also engaging the university community in creating an inclusive, transformational environment that provides a platform for innovation and inclusion. The Military & Veterans Services office serves as a bridge between the US Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and Howard University.  
Howard University is approved by the VA to certify veterans' education benefits for approved undergraduate and graduate programs of study. The OMVS facilitates the certification of enrollment process for student to request VA benefits. The following is a list of the approved veteran benefits that are offered at Howard University: Chapter 30 - Montgomery GI Bill ®, Chapter 31 - Veterans Readiness & Employment, Chapter 33 - Post 911 GI Bill®, Chapter 35 -Dependents’ Educational Assistance (DEA) Program, Chapter 1606 - Montgomery GI Bill®, and the Yellow Ribbon Program. To learn more about these benefits visit https://www.va.gov/education  
Howard University ensures the following regulations of administering VA education benefits: 
• 
Except for dissertation and limited research courses, the VA will not pay for the student to repeat any course that is successfully passed. 

• 
The school agrees to maintain a written record of previous education and training of veterans (and all eligible persons for veterans’ benefits) which clearly indicates that appropriate credit has been given by the school for previous education and training, with the training period shortened proportionately, and the student and the Department of Veterans Affairs so notified. 

• 
‘‘GI Bill® is a registered trademark of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). More information about education benefits offered by VA is available at the official U.S. government Web site at http://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill." 


For more information on using your VA Educational Benefits at Howard University, please visit our website https://studentaffairs.howard.edu/OMVS or contact us by phone at 202-238-2422 or email veterans@howard.edu.  
Pending Payment Compliance Statement in Accordance with Title 38 US Code 3679(e)  
In compliance with Title 38 United States Code Section 3679(e), Howard University has updated its academic regulations regarding participation of covered individuals in courses of education and the prohibition of assessment of penalties for those individuals related to delayed VA funding. Covered Individuals: A covered individual is any individual who is entitled to receive educational assistance under one of the following chapters: Veteran Readiness and Employment (Chapter 31) or Post-9/11 GI Bill® (Chapter 33) benefits. 
To qualify for this provision, such students may be required to: 
• 
Produce the VA Certificate of Eligibility (COE): A certificate of eligibility can also include a Statement of Benefits obtained from the Department of Veterans Affairs’ (VA) website – eBenefits, or a VAF 28-1905 form for chapter 31 authorization purposes. 

• 
Certification to Receive Veterans Benefits: Students must notify the Office of Military & Veterans Services each semester that they are ready to be certified. Failure to notify the office may result in classes not being certified and students may be dropped from their classes. 

• 
Students must follow a Howard University College degree plan to receive their benefits. Students should meet with a counselor every semester for assistance in selecting courses. 


Howard University will not impose any penalty, on any covered individual because of the individual’s inability to meet his or her financial obligations to Howard University due to the delayed disbursement funding from VA under Chapters 31 or 33 including: 
• 
the assessment of late fees, 

• 
the denial of access to classes, libraries, or other Howard University facilities, or 

• 
the requirement that a covered individual secure additional or alternative funds.  


Compliance Statement in Accordance with Section 1018 of Public Law 116-315 
In compliance with Section 1018 of Public Law 116-315, Howard University will update its academic regulations regarding participation of covered individuals in courses of education and will not enact policies that violate these laws. Covered Individuals under Title 38 United States Code Section 3679(e): A covered individual is any individual who is entitled to receive educational assistance under one of the following chapters: Montgomery GI Bill ® (Chapter 30), Veteran Readiness and Employment (Chapter 31), Post-9/11 GI Bill® (Chapter 33), Dependents’ Educational Assistance (DEA) (Chapter 35), or Montgomery GI Bill ® - Selected Reserve (Chapter 1606) benefits. 
Howard University will: 
• 
Ensure each covered individual approves of the enrollment in a course by requiring each student to request certification every semester with the Office of Military and Veterans Services. 

• 
Allow enrolled members of the Armed Forces, including reserve components and National Guard to be readmitted if such members are temporarily unavailable or must suspend enrollment by reason of serving in the Armed Forces. 

• 
Accommodate short absences for such services in the Armed Forces provided that satisfactory academic progress is being made by the service members and reservists prior to suspending their studies.  


Services and/or assistance to military-connected students studying at Howard University are available through the Office of Student Services, in the following areas: academic tutoring, housing, financial aid, employment, and other areas of special interest or concern. The Office of Military and Veterans Services (OMVS) is located at the Harriet Tubman Quadrangle (The Quad), 2455 4th NW, Lower Level, Washington, DC 20059. 
ROTC 
ROTC offers a program that leads to a commission as an officer in the Army or the Air Force. It is an elective and can be taken by those who desire it just like any other course. For additional information, call Army ROTC at (202) 806-6784 or Air Force ROTC at (202) 806-6788. 
INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS 
Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) regulations governing nonimmigrant international students require that all students in the “F-1” and “M-1” visa categories be engaged in a full course of study. Undergraduates with “F-1” visas are required to be registered at all times for a minimum of 12 credit hours of course work. Graduate students with “F-1” visas and all “J-1” visa holders are not required to take a specific number of credit hours as long as they are engaged in a full course of study as determined by their departments. Students must maintain full-time status throughout the semester. A student who begins with 12 credit hours or more but then drops courses later and no longer carries 12 credit hours is considered a part-time student. Students who do not meet these requirements are in violation of their immigration status and jeopardize their stay in the United States. All financial arrangements for study at Howard University must be made prior to registration time. 
It is each student’s responsibility to maintain legal immigration status while in the United States and must make sure that their authorized stay in the country has not expired (see 1-94 form); that their passports are valid for at least 6 months at all times; that they are registered every semester as a full- time student; that they do not work off campus without permission of the INS; that they attend the school that the INS last authorized you to attend. 
International students must apply to INS to (1) extend their authorized stay in the United States, (2) obtain permission to work off campus and (3) transfer from Howard University to another school or from another school to Howard University. Further information and appropriate application forms can be obtained from [International Student Services in Room G- Administration Building.] 
If a student’s immigration status change for any reason — for example, from a tourist visa to student visa or from student visa to permanent resident — are required to immediately inform International Student Services so that the University will have accurate records. International students are required to provide their current address. 

Bookstores 
THE UNIVERSITY BOOKSTORE is located at 2225 Georgia Ave. NW. It stocks textbooks, reference materials, academic supplies, art, computer hardware, software, apparel, and gifts. Hours of operation are 9:00 am to 6:00 pm Monday through Friday (except Thursday); 9:00 am to 7:00 pm Thursday; 10:00 am to 4:00 pm Saturday. To contact the Howard University Bookstore, please call (202) 238-2640. 
THE SCHOOL OF LAW BOOKSTORE is located at 2900 Van Ness St. NW on the lower level of Holy Cross Hall. It provides course books, study aids, legal outlines, school supplies, and convenience items. Hours of operation are 9:00 am to 5:00 pm Monday through Friday. To contact the School of Law Bookstore, please call (202) 806-8108. 

Student Records 
POLICY GOVERNING THE MAINTENANCE OF STUDENT RECORDS, THE RIGHTS OF STUDENTS REGARDING SUCH RECORDS, AND THE RELEASE OF INFORMATION ON STUDENTS TO THIRD PARTIES Approved by the Board of Trustees, September 27, 1975 
IT IS THE POLICY OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF HOWARD UNIVERSITY THAT: 
Students should have access to information about themselves in the University record-keeping systems. An individual student shall be accorded the right to correct or amend, upon reasonable request, an inaccurate record. The information contained in a student’s educational record file shall not be disclosed or used for other than authorized University purposes without his or her written consent unless required by law. Student files shall be retained for a reasonable period of time. The Office of the Vice President for Student Affairs is hereby charged with the responsibility of implementing the policy within the following guidelines. 
GUIDELINES 
Confidential Nature of Student Records—Student educational records, except as herein set forth in this policy statement, shall be kept confidential, with respect to requests made by all persons other than appropriate school officials, as determined by the President, or other Executive level officers of the University or parents of a dependent student, as defined for income tax deduction purposes in Section 152 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code. 
Release of Information to Investigators — When written consent has been received by the University from a student who is the subject of a governmental or employment investigation, information requested by such investigator from records or such students may be released through authorized staff personnel of the University within whose offices such records are maintained upon proper identification of the investigator. Investigators must adequately identify themselves through the display of official credentials, must indicate the agency they represent and demonstrate a satisfactory basis for their request. Even as to such investigators, information in student records, not priority released will be withheld if a student timely notifies Office of the Registrar in writing that he or she has withdrawn his or her prior consent. Student consent forms with reference to their educational records should be filed with the Office of the Registrar that will, in turn, notify appropriate offices of the University that such consent has been given and in the event, such consent is withdrawn will direct these offices to discontinue release of such information. 
Student Educational Records — The Office of the Vice President for Student Affairs shall prepare annually a list of the various categories of student educational records extant in the University. This list shall be promulgated in such ways as to afford students an opportunity to know of the kinds of records kept and their location. The list shall contain a summary explanation of the kinds of records kept under each category (e.g., Academic Records), and the cost, if any, which will be charged to the parent or student for reproducing copies of such records. It shall be known as the Student Educational Records List. 
Student Addresses and Telephones —Officers and employees of the University will not normally release addresses or telephone numbers of students to persons not officially connected with the University. There may be an exception in cases of emergencies. Requests under claimed emergencies will be referred to the Office of the Dean for Special Student Services or the Office of the Dean of Residence Life for the purpose of making a judgment as to whether, under the circumstances, such information should be released. 
Student Review of Records 
A student may make a written request to review an educational record of a type found on the Student Educational Record List at any appropriate University office at any reasonable time. Upon receipt of such requests, the office involved will make the arrangements necessary to accommodate requests for review of student records as soon thereafter as practicable. A student may waive in writing the right to review letters of recommendation written on his or her behalf or at his or her request which has been placed in his or her educational record after January 1, 1975. If a student challenges the contents of his or her student educational records on the grounds that they are either inaccurate, misleading or otherwise recorded in violation of his or her rights he or she shall be accorded a hearing in order to provide an opportunity for the correction or deletion of any inaccurate, misleading or otherwise inappropriate data contained therein, and to insert into such record, where found to be warranted, a written explanation from an appropriate source respecting the content of such records. The hearing shall be conducted by a person designated by the President of the University or his designee. Such person shall not have a direct interest in the outcome of the hearing. It should be expressly understood that such a hearing is not to be used as a forum to contest whether a teacher should have assigned a higher grade because a student or parent believes that the student was entitled to a higher grade. 
Records Not Subject to Review 
Records maintained by the University with respect to which a student does not have a right of review include but are not limited to instructors’ or administrators’ notes, financial statements submitted by parents in support of applications for financial aid, and letters of recommendation received by the University prior to January 1, 1975. 
Faculty Review of Student Academic Record 
Individual faculty members may review academic records of their students with the students’ consent, except that such consent shall not be necessary for faculty members who serve as advisors and other administrative officers or counselors of the University in the discharge of their official functions. Research Involving Student Records The University recognizes research by graduate students, faculty, and administrative staff as a fundamental component of its overall mission. Occasionally such research involves the use of data that is to be extracted from student records which are essentially confidential. Approval to conduct such research must first be obtained from the person in charge of the involved discipline(s) and, following this, authorization to utilize student records must be obtained from the administrative officer under whose jurisdiction the records which are to be utilized are maintained. In such instances, the administrative officer maintaining custody of such records shall make every effort to ensure the anonymity of identifying information contained in the records utilized. 
Removal of Records from Custodial Office 
Except, as required, in cases involving litigation, a student’s permanent academic record may not be removed from the Office of the Registrar. Copies of the content of such records may be made available to administrative staff officials in conducting official business involving such records. 
Retention of Student Records 
Admission applications (of individuals who actually enroll) and academic records shall be maintained indefinitely by the Office of the Registrar. Records of student financial indebtedness to the University shall be maintained on an indefinite basis. Health records on students shall be kept for a period of five years after graduation or anticipated date of graduation. Student personnel records shall be retained for two years following graduation. Disciplinary records of students involving sanctions less than expulsion or indefinite suspension shall be maintained by the Office of the Vice President for Student Affairs for a period of five years following the graduation of such individuals except that in cases where the student does not graduate, the record shall be maintained for a period of eight years following the last enrollment. Records of students who are expelled or suspended indefinitely, whether for academic, health or disciplinary reasons, shall be maintained on an indefinite basis. Records of convictions of students who are convicted in civil courts of (1) misdemeanors involving moral turpitude, and (2) all felonies may be retained by the Office of the Vice President for Student Affairs for a period of five and eight years, respectively, following such convictions. 
Requests for Judicial Process 
When any subpoena or other judicial order is issued requesting information about a student, the officer receiving the order or subpoena shall immediately contact the Office of the General Counsel. 
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES RELATING TO THE RIGHTS OF STUDENTS REGARDING RECORDS MAINTAINED ON THEM BY HOWARD UNIVERSITY 
1. 
The University will at least annually, provide notice to students, of the following: 1. 
the types of educational records and information contained therein directly related to students and maintained by the University; 

2. 
the name, position, and campus location of the official responsible for the maintenance of each type of record to which students have a right of access; and 

3. 
the categories of information, if any, which the University has designated as directory information. 




2. 
A student desiring to review a reviewable University record shall execute in writing a form entitled “Request for Review of Student Record” obtained from and provided by the office concerned. A record of all requests for review of records by students, including the disposition thereof, shall be maintained by all offices of the University in which such requests are made. In instances in which a student requests a review of the contents of a University record, the office involved shall provide for such review with an appropriate official of the office within a reasonable time. Costs incurred in connection with furnishing a student a copy of anything contained in the University record and requested by such student will be borne by the student. Such appropriate costs will be established by the Vice President for Fiscal Affairs in consultation with the Vice President for Student Affairs. 

3. 
A student, who after having reviewed a University record, is of the opinion that such record contains information or material that is inaccurate, misleading or should not be maintained by the University, must first execute in writing a form entitled, “Request for Purge/Removal of University Record” obtained in the office concerned. Upon the receipt of such request, the administrative officer of the office involved shall carefully review the request and make an appropriate disposition. In considering such request, the University official(s) involved will make a diligent effort to resolve the matter informally, amicably and in the best interests of the student and the University. If the student making the request objects to the action taken, he/she may request in writing a hearing in which the propriety of the action taken may be contested. It should be expressly understood that such a hearing is not to be used as a forum to contest whether a teacher should have assigned a higher grade because a student believes that he or she was entitled to a higher grade. 

4. 
Upon notice that the student wishes to have a hearing, the office involved shall notify in writing the Office of the General Counsel of the University. A hearing officer, for the purpose of hearing appeals requested by students, shall be designated by the Office of the General Counsel. The hearing officer shall schedule the date, time and place of such hearing. Upon notice from the hearing office, the Dean or Director of the office involved shall provide written notification to the student as to the date, time and place of the hearing. The Dean or Director will select one person to be the University representative at such hearing. 

5. 
At all such hearings, the student and the University representative will be accorded the following procedural rights: 1. 
Advance notice of the date, time, and place of the scheduled hearing 

2. 
Personal appearance 

3. 
To present their case or have the same presented in their behalf by anyone of their choice; 

4. 
To present evidence and to call witnesses. 




6. 
The hearing officer will render a written decision and provide the student petitioner and the University representative with a copy of the decision within a reasonable period following the conclusion of the hearing. Where the student involved receives an adverse decision, he shall have a right to petition the Vice President for Student Affairs for an appeal. Both the student and the University representative may submit a written argument in support of their position. The Vice President for Student Affairs may decide on the petition that no further hearing of the matter is required or he may decide to reopen the matter and hear the case over again. Where the Vice President for Student Affairs determines that there need be no further hearing, the decision rendered by the hearing officer will be final. Where the Vice President for Student Affairs decides to reopen the case, the decision rendered by him shall be final. 


STUDENT EDUCATIONAL RECORD LIST 
Records the University maintains on students are described and listed below. Offices maintaining such records are specified and their locations indicated. These offices are open Monday through Friday (except holidays) from 8:30 am until 3:00 pm. 
Academic records — Academic records on students contain applications for admission, (including applications for readmission), the Howard University permanent record (containing all grades duly recorded), instructors’ grade reports, and copies of official forms or reports reflecting, special grade reports and records of all total withdrawals from the University by students. The above records are maintained by and located in Office of the Registrar, Suite 104, Mordecai Wyatt Johnson (Administration) Building. 
SPECIAL NOTE ON ACADEMIC RECORDS 
Records bearing directly on the academic status of students are also maintained in the offices of the appropriate academic Dean, the department in which students’ major programs are supervised and coordinated as well as the offices of student advisors of the respective schools and colleges in which such students are enrolled. These records generally include SAT (Scholastic Aptitude Test) and CEEB (College Entrance Examination Board) scores, high school transcripts, college/university transcripts for institutions previously attended, high school equivalency (GED) scores and certificates of completion (in specialized areas), and the like, such as-in the case of international students-a certificate evidencing adequate familiarity with the English language. The locations of these specific offices may be ascertained by inquiring at the office of the appropriate academic Dean. 
Violations of the University Code of Conduct and Criminal Laws Records 
Records on individual students who have been implicated in violations of the University Code of Conduct and/or locally operative criminal laws and as a result of which the University Office of Security and Safety Services has become involved. Records of the above-listed incidents are maintained by and are located in the Office of Security and Safety Services, 2nd floor, Service Center Building, 2244 10th Street NW (202-806-1073). 
Disciplinary Records, Student Misconduct Records, and Records of Infractions of Code of Conduct 
Records of student conduct involving infractions of conduct standards established for students are maintained by and are located in the Office of the Dean for Special Student Services, Room 725, Howard Center, 2225 Georgia Avenue. 
Financial Aid Records 
Financial aid records of students contain applications for financial aid or part-time employment (including work study), credentials submitted in support of such applications’ loans as well as information on action taken on such applications. These records are maintained by and are located in Financial Aid. Records of specialized financial aid which is pursued through direct application to departments of one’s specialization are maintained by and located in such departments. 
Student Financial Services 
An individual’s account record reflects all financial transactions made with the University in connection with the payment of required tuition, fees, room rent, and special assessments such as library book charges, and the like. Any adjustment made in the account, for whatever reason, is similarly reflected. This record is maintained by and located in Student Financial Services/Student Accounts, Suite 115, Administration Building. 
Student Employment 
Records are maintained on students who apply for employment through the Office of Career Planning and Placement. These records contain the subject’s resume and letters of recommendation, if any, such as are submitted at his/her request. Such records are maintained by and are located in the Office of Career Planning and Placement, Wing I, Second Floor, C.B. Powell Building. Members of the faculty, student body, or staff who have questions regarding the information above are invited to inquire at the Office of the Dean for Special Student Services, Room 725, Howard Center on the main campus, or by telephone at (202) 806-2120. 

Howard University Student Code Of Conduct and Judiciaries 
Preamble 
Howard University affirms that the central purpose of a university is the pursuit of truth, the discovery of new knowledge through scholarly research, the teaching and overall development of students, and the transmission of knowledge and learning to the world at large. However, the establishment and maintenance of a community where there is freedom to teach and to learn is dependent on maintaining an appropriate sense of order that allows for the pursuit of these objectives in an environment that is both safe and free of invidious disruption. 
Rules and regulations are necessary to mark the boundaries of this needed order. However, the rights of the individual demand that honesty, integrity, responsibility, and respect for persons and property must form the core values upon which those rules and regulations are based. All members of the University community share a mutual responsibility to practice these values. 
It is expected that student conduct will be in concert with, and supportive of, the University’s central purpose and core values. Examples of prohibited student behavior are described in this Student Code of Conduct (“Code”). Behaviors that reasonably indicate a violation of the Code will give rise to the immediate consideration of resolution through the University’s disciplinary process. 
The Code is applicable to all students, which includes all persons taking courses at the University, either full-time or part-time, pursuing undergraduate, graduate, professional or unclassified studies. Persons who withdraw after allegedly violating the Code, who are not officially enrolled for a particular semester or term, but have a continuing relationship with the University, or who have been notified of their acceptance for admission are considered “students,” as are persons who are living in University residence halls, although not enrolled in this institution. Those persons include, but are not limited to new, continuing or transfer students, participants involved in pre-college programs, workshops, seminars, special classes, summer programs, athletic programs, and camps affiliated with the University. The Code applies to all locations of the University and to all student groups and organizations as referenced in the Code. 
It is the responsibility and duty of students to become acquainted with all provisions of the Code. It is presumed that every student, from the date of his/her initial acceptance at the University, has knowledge of the Code, the Academic Code of Conduct, the University Code of Ethics and Conduct, as well as policies and procedures contained in the H-Book, the Bulletin, and the Directory of Classes. All students are deemed to have agreed to the Code and are required to adhere to the Code as a condition of enrollment at the University. 

Section I: Scope, Limitations, and Applicability of the Code 
The Code applies to incidents occurring on campus and, as further explained below, to some situations occurring off-campus. Incidents that involve students and that occur at institutions that are part of the Washington Metropolitan Area Consortium of Universities are also subject to this Code. Students who are involved in clinical rotations, practicum, internships, externships or other activities directly involved with an academic program of study are also subject to the Code. 
The actual daily administration, enforcement, and operation of the University’s judicial program are delegated to the Office of the Dean for Special Student Services (ODSSS). 
This Code does not address academic offenses. The University’s schools and colleges administer the academic disciplinary process. Students must contact the appropriate school or college for information on disciplinary procedures regarding academic issues. 
Judicial action against any student committing a violation of the Code off-campus will be considered on a case-by-case basis upon receipt of the filing by a Complainant of an Allegation of an Off-Campus Violation of the Howard University Student Code of Conduct form. The Complainant must obtain the form from the ODSSS, and the form must be completed and returned to that office. After review of the form, ODSSS will make a determination of its appropriateness for University disciplinary action. Examples of off-campus matters that would typically be excluded from resolution under the Code are landlord/tenant disputes, certain personal business matters with offcampus entities, and non-violent domestic issues. Disciplinary action may be taken with respect to any student convicted of, or charged with, a felony or misdemeanor, as delineated in Section V: Special Provisions on Students Charged With Or Convicted of A Criminal Act. 
Depending on the severity or nature of the charge, students who violate the Code are subject to a range of disciplinary actions up to and including suspension or expulsion and may be barred from all University-owned and operated the property and all University-sponsored events and activities. 
The consequences are serious for students who are charged and/or found guilty of misconduct under this Code. Therefore, any member of the University community, who knowingly and willfully misuses the procedures of the Code to harm another member of the University Community, shall be subject to disciplinary action. 

Section II: Cooperation with Law Enforcement Authorities 
The University cooperates fully with law enforcement authorities and violations of the Code that are also violations of federal or local law may be referred to the appropriate non-University authority. Proceedings under the Code may be carried out prior to, simultaneously with, or following civil or criminal proceedings off-campus at the discretion of the Dean for Special Student Services. Determinations made or sanctions imposed under the Code shall not be subject to change because criminal charges arising out of the same facts as a result of the violation of University rules were dismissed, reduced, or resolved in favor of or against the criminal law defendant. 
The Howard University Police Department (HUPD) works closely with area law enforcement agencies, particularly the Washington, DC Metropolitan Police Department (MPD). HUPD officers have full powers of arrest, search, and seizure on all University-owned and operated property and are usually the first to respond to calls for police services on campus. However, complainants may request that MPD respond to any reported offense or incident that may violate the law. 

Section III: Student Rights, Freedoms, and Responsibilities 
With appreciation for the tradition of freedom of expression on campus, the University reasserts its commitment to fostering and tolerating different viewpoints. It acknowledges that points of view will diverge and that some students will believe it necessary to express themselves by means of protest. However, the University will not tolerate disruption to its academic mission nor the means of protest that interfere with the legitimate rights of others. 
1. General Rights and Freedoms 
Students shall have the following rights and freedoms: As members of the University community, all students are guaranteed freedom of expression, inquiry and assembly, the right to form a student government, organize groups, to join associations in support of any cause or common interest, and to peacefully protest, provided that such activity is conducted in a legal manner, is in accordance with University regulations, and does not abridge the rights of others. 
Students have the right of fair access to all educational opportunities and benefits available at the University in an environment that is safe and free of invidious harassment, discrimination, or intimidation. 
Students have a right to privacy in accordance with the policy expressed in the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 (FERPA). 
Students have the right and responsibility to report, in good faith and without fear of retaliation, violations of this Code, the University Code of Ethics and Conduct, and violations of any other policy of the University, to appropriate academic or administrative officers of the University. 
2. Procedural Rights and Freedoms 
Students accused of violating this Code have the following rights: To have access to all University policies and procedures regarding the functioning of the disciplinary process. 
To be informed of and to have explained as required the pending charges. To be free from intimidation by University employees in the resolution of disciplinary matters. To face accuser(s) and have the opportunity to cross-examine them and any witnesses. To be free from searches or seizures unless based on reasonable cause by appropriate officials. In accordance with written procedures approved by the Vice President for Student Affairs, searches and seizures may be made by the Vice President for Student Affairs and his/her designee, housing staff, University officers and officials and University Police. To have a fair and impartial hearing before an appropriately appointed hearing board, appeal board, or Administrative Hearing Officer. 
3. Responsibilities 
All students share the following responsibilities: 
• 
To read, become familiar with and adhere to the Code, the University’s Code of Ethics and Conduct, the Academic Code of Student Conduct, the H-Book, and the relevant academic Bulletin of the school or college in which the student is enrolled. 

• 
To respect the personal and property rights of others and to act in a responsible manner at all times. 

• 
To protect and foster the intellectual, academic, cultural, social, and other missions of the University. 

• 
To observe the laws of local, state, and federal governments. 



Section IV: Emergency Action Suspensions and Involuntary Administrative Total Withdrawals 
1. 
Emergency Action Suspension As the Chief Executive Officer of the University, the President holds the ultimate authority in matters of student discipline. Unless otherwise exercised or modified by the President, this emergency authority is delegated to the Dean for Special Student Services. On rare occasions, this authority may be exercised on an exigent basis to protect a student’s own physical or emotional safety and well-being, University property and/or the health and safety of particular individuals and/or the University community, or to prevent the threat of disruption of, or interference with, the normal operations of the University. On such occasions, the President or Dean for Special Student Services may take emergency administrative action to immediately suspend a student’s enrollment. The student will be notified in writing and/or orally of this action and the reasons for the suspension. An Emergency Action Suspension Hearing (EASH) will be held as soon as one can be convened, within thirty (30) days from notification of action. The purpose of the EASH will be to determine if the student may remain enrolled until a regular Disciplinary Hearing, as described in Section V of the Code, is held and a decision is rendered. The notice will include the time, date and place of the hearing. 

2. 
Involuntary Administrative Total Withdrawals In situations where the University cannot effectively monitor or control the conditions or behaviors of certain students, it reserves the right to effect an Involuntary Administrative Total Withdrawal. In circumstances where the mental, emotional and/or physical welfare of the student and the various elements of the University community are in jeopardy, or where the student’s behavior and conduct becomes an imminent danger, it may become necessary to take emergency action to temporarily or permanently separate a student from the campus community. Further, the University reserves the right to contact the student’s parent, guardian, or next of kin in the event of a medical emergency. The Family Education Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA, 34 CFR 99.36) provides for the release of normally protected student information when it is believed that the student represents a health or safety risk to self or others. This policy will be instituted in the event that a student (a) demonstrates behaviors or lack of good judgment, suicidal behaviors, self-destructive behaviors, or has untreated or uncontrollable medical or mental conditions which result in actual or possible imminent danger of injury to themselves or members of the University community; (b) demonstrates an inability, without adequate care, to satisfy personal needs, to include activities of daily living, nourishment and maintenance of shelter; (c) demonstrates a behavior due to mental, emotional, or medical incapacitation which poses an imminent danger of causing significant property damage, or directly and substantially impedes the lawful activities of others, interferes with the educational process or the orderly operation of the University; or (d) fails to comply with requirements to adhere to the instructions and guidelines of the clinical/medical staff of the University Counseling Service, Student Health Center or Howard University Hospital, as a result of an episode of mental or medical crisis intervention. During the period of involuntary administrative total withdrawal, a student may be denied access to the campus, classes, residence halls, University activities, and denied privileges for which the student might otherwise be eligible, as the Dean for Special Student Services may determine to be appropriate. In making this determination, the Dean for Special Student Services will consult with appropriate academic administrators and health care professionals, to include but not limited to the Dean for the University Counseling Service and the Medical Director of the Student Health Center. 


Timeline of Process 
Howard University will schedule a hearing within thirty (30) days of the student’s Emergency Action Suspension or Involuntary Administrative Total Withdrawal unless the student makes a written request asking that the hearing occur sooner than thirty (30) days. However, if the student submits a written request for an earlier hearing date, the hearing will not occur any sooner than ten (10) business days following receipt of the written request. The Dean for Special Student Services will notify the student in writing and/or orally indicate the reason for the Emergency Action Suspension or Involuntary Administrative Total Withdrawal and the date, time and place of the hearing. Appropriate University personnel may be present and/or consulted at this meeting. Parents, spouses, or any persons who would be of support to the student may, with the consent of the Dean for Special Student Services and the student, participate in the hearing.1 At the hearing, the University will state its reasons for concern and the student will be given an opportunity to respond. 
The Dean for Special Student Services will notify the student in writing of the decision and the basis for the decision within ten (10) business days of the hearing. 
If it is determined that the student does not present a threat to himself/herself or others, the student will be permitted to continue as a student. If the decision is that the Emergency Action Suspension or Involuntary Administrative Total Withdrawal shall remain in effect, the communication will indicate what, if any, stipulations may govern his or her return to the University. Such stipulations may include providing certification from a healthcare professional indicating the student is able to return to the University. The Section 504 Coordinator may be involved when a student seeks a return to the University. 
Appeal 
Students who wish to appeal Emergency Action Suspensions and Involuntary Administrative Total Withdrawals shall submit their appeal to the Dean for Special Student Services, who will forward the appeal through the Vice President for Student Affairs to the Provost or to the Senior Vice President for Health Sciences. In those cases where internal and/or external health professionals were consulted, a report of findings and response to the appeal will be obtained. In those cases, where internal and/or external health professionals were consulted, a report of findings and response to the appeal will be obtained. 
In addition, the President or Dean for Special Student Services may require the student, at his or her expense, to obtain a psychiatric/medical evaluation from appropriate professionals external to the University to be presented. The Office of the General Counsel will be consulted for legal advice before a final decision regarding the appeal of an emergency action is reached. There shall be no further appeal of this decision. 

Section V: Emergency Action of Students Charged with a Criminal Act 
A student charged with a crime, either a misdemeanor or felony, by any local, state, or federal entity may be subject to an Emergency Action Suspension by the Dean for Special Student Services. 
In addition, disciplinary proceedings may be instituted against a student charged with conduct that potentially violates both the criminal law and the Code without regard to the pendency of the civil or criminal litigation in court or criminal arrest and prosecution. Proceedings under this Code may be carried out prior to, simultaneously with, or following civil or criminal proceedings off-campus at the discretion of the Dean for Special Student Services. Determinations made or sanctions imposed under this Code shall not be subject to change because criminal charges arising out of the same facts giving rise to a violation of the Code were dismissed, reduced, or resolved in favor of or against the criminal defendant. 
Emergency Action Suspension of a student charged with a criminal act will occur only in situations where the University determines there is a risk of substantial harm to the health or safety of the student or other individuals or to prevent the threat of disruption of, or interference with, the normal operations of the University. An individualized assessment will be made after consultation with the Office of the General Counsel and after considering the best available objective information. 
Timeline of Process 
Howard University will schedule a hearing within thirty (30) days of the student’s Emergency Action Suspension, unless the student makes a written request asking that the hearing occur sooner than thirty (30) days. However, if the student submits a written request for an earlier hearing date, the hearing will not occur any sooner than ten (10) business days following the receipt of the written request. The Dean for Special Student Services will notify the student in writing and/or orally indicating the reason for the Emergency Action Suspension and the date, time, and place of the hearing. 
A student may be suspended or expelled prior to the final resolution of the criminal matter, but a student has the affirmative duty to notify the University of the conclusion of the matter. After being duly notified of the scheduled disciplinary hearing, if the charged student is unable to appear due to incarceration or incapacitation at the time of the regular disciplinary hearing, the student may request in writing that the disciplinary hearing be postponed and rescheduled when he or she is able to appear, or after the conclusion of the criminal proceedings. 
Additionally, the student has an affirmative duty to notify the University of any status change in the criminal matter. If a student does not provide such notice or fails to communicate with the University within one (1) calendar year, the University will take measures for permanent expulsion. 
University Decisions Upon Criminal Conviction 
It is the University’s policy that a student convicted of a felony shall be expelled from the institution, irrespective of the student’s current enrollment status. A decision about the continued enrollment of any student convicted of a misdemeanor will be made on a case-by-case basis by the Dean for Special Student Services, which may be appealed through the Office of the Vice President for Student Affairs to the Office of the Provost or the Office of the Senior Vice President for Health Affairs for students in the Division of Health Affairs. 

Section VI: Filing a Complaint and Request for University Disciplinary Action and Notification to the Accused 
Reports of violations of the Code may result from a written Incident Report taken by Campus Police. If a charge of a violation of the Code is not made as a result of such report, it is the responsibility of the Complainant, whether a student or University employee, to take action to pursue resolution of a violation. First, the Complainant must review the Code to determine the specific provisions violated by the Accused Student. Second, the Complainant must obtain, complete, and file a Request for Resolution of an Alleged Violation of the Student Code of Conduct form within fourteen (14) calendar days of the incident or knowledge of the incident. Forms submitted after this fourteen (14) calendar day period will only be resolved if extenuating circumstances are present, and require approval of the Dean for Special Student Services. More than one provision of the Code may be cited in the complaint form. The forms are available in the Office of the Dean for Special Student Services. 
The Accused Student will be notified by the Dean for Special Student Services of an alleged violation by certified letter and/or telephone call and will be asked to report to the Dean for an interview. ODSSS will make reasonable efforts to contact the student at the local and/or permanent address. 

Section VII: Initial Administrative Action on Allegations of Violations of the Code 
If a determination is made by Dean for Special Student Services that a violation of the Code may have occurred, the Complainant(s) and the Accused Student(s) will be contacted by the Dean for Special Student Services within fifteen (15) business days after receipt of the completed Request for Resolution of an Alleged Violation of the Student Code of Conduct form. 
Both the Complainant(s) and the Accused Student(s) will be required to put in writing their accounts of the incident. Upon written notification, the Complainant(s) and the Accused Student(s) may request that their full written accounts be submitted to the Howard University Police Department and substituted for the incident statement. The Accused Student(s) will be informed of the allegation and related information, and he/she will be given an opportunity to provide his/her version of the facts, and allowed to plead “Responsible” or “Not Responsible.” The Incident Statements of the Complainant(s) and Accused(s) will be shared with both parties, upon request. 
If the Accused Student(s) fails to respond within six (6) business days of the date of the communication, the Dean for Special Student Services may proceed with scheduling and convene a hearing to resolve the matter. 
A plea of “Not Responsible” by the Accused Student(s) will result in an automatic remanding the case to the appropriate hearing board or to an Administrative Hearing Office at the discretion of the Dean for Special Student Services. The Accused Student(s) and the Complainant(s) will be notified by mail of the date, time and place of the hearing. 
All “Responsible” pleas by the Accused will result in an ODSSS review of the case and determination of appropriate sanction(s) to be imposed. The Complainant will receive written notification of the sanction(s). The sanction(s), not the plea, may be appealed in writing to ODSSS using the process for Filing an Appeal outlined in Section XVI, except when the Dean for Special Student Services appoints an Appeals Hearing Officer during periods when an Appeals Board cannot be convened. 

Section VIII: Prohibited Behaviors 
The following is an illustrative list of the types of conduct, including actual conduct and attempts to engage in such conduct, which are prohibited by this Code. A reasonable suspicion that a student has engaged in or attempted to engage in, such prohibited conduct will result in the immediate consideration of disciplinary action under this Code. 
1. 
Safety 1. 
Causing any condition that jeopardizes the safety of individuals, groups of individuals, or the University community; participating in conduct or behavior that explicitly endangers the safety and well-being of oneself or others. 

2. 
Tampering with safety measures or devices, such as alarm systems, fire extinguishers, exit signs, emergency phone systems, smoke or heat detectors, fire hoses, security systems, locked exterior or interior doors, and sprinkler systems. 

3. 
Failing to conform to safety regulations, such as falsely reporting an incident, failure to evacuate facilities in a timely fashion in emergency situations or in response to fire alarms, inappropriate use of the alarm system, and similar conduct. 

4. 
Falsely reporting the presence or threat of a bomb or any other dangerous device or condition. 

5. 
Having the knowledge of and not reporting an event or act that would potentially endanger members of the University community. 




2. 
Weapons 1. 
Possession of weapons including firearms, items that eject projectiles, knives, or any item that any reasonable person would consider to have the possibility of doing bodily harm. 

2. 
Possessing, using, storing, or transporting firearms, other weapons, explosives, fireworks, ammunition, tear gas or dangerous chemicals, except as authorized for use in class, or in connection with University-sponsored research or other approved activities. 




3. 
Discrimination Engaging in verbal or physical behavior directed at an individual or group based on national origin, race, creed, gender, religious beliefs, or sexual orientation that, according to a person of reasonable sensibilities, is likely to create an intimidating or demeaning environment that impedes the access of other students, faculty and staff to the educational benefits available to them as a member of the University community. The Code includes bias-related or hate crimes as defined in the DC Code. Wearing articles of clothing with derogatory, racist, discriminatory, patently offensive, profane, sexually explicit, or graphic messages either in words or pictures, which demonstrate bias or discrimination against any individual or group within the University community. 

4. 
Harassment Engaging in verbal, electronic, visual, written or physical behavior directed at an individual or group that, in the view of a person of reasonable sensibilities, is likely to provoke or otherwise result in, a negative or injurious response, mental or emotional distress, or related reaction or consequence. This behavior may include: 1. 
Making an expressed or implied threat affecting another person’ academic pursuits, University employment, or participation in activities sponsored by the University or organizations or groups related to the University, or; 

2. 
Engaging in unwarranted obstruction or interference with respect to educational, campus activity, or personal pursuits, employment or participation, which includes but is not limited to: behaviors or communications which detract or interfere with an instructor’s ability to provide instruction in the classroom, laboratory, clinical practicum or clerkship, or any activity directly related to teaching, instruction or academic advisement and counseling, or any academic support services throughout the University community. 

3. 
Creating an intimidating or demeaning situation or environment or inflicting personal, social, academic, psychological or emotional harm, or undue stress. 




5. 
Sexual Harassment The “Howard University Policy Against Sexual Harassment and Gender Based Discrimination in Education Programs and Activities” covers undergraduate, graduate and professional students, teaching and graduate assistants. With respect to academic programs and activities, “sexual harassment” shall mean unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other electronic, verbal, visual, written or physical conduct of a sexual nature, when: 1. 
Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly as a basis for any decision affecting the terms or conditions of participation in any organization, program or activity, or status or evaluation (including grades) in an academic course; or 

2. 
Such conduct has the purpose or affect of unreasonably interfering with a student’s educational right, privilege, advantage, or opportunity. 

3. 
Such conduct is so pervasive or severe that it creates an intimidating, stressful, hostile, or offensive environment for learning and has no reasonable relationship to the subject matter of the relevant course of instruction. 




6. 
Assault Any willful attempt or threat to inflict injury upon the person of another, when coupled with an apparent present ability to do so, and any intentional display of force such as would give the victim reason to fear bodily harm constitutes an assault. An assault may be committed without actually touching or striking, or doing bodily harm. Self-defense may be a mitigating factor to this charge, depending on the circumstances. 

7. 
Sexual Abuse Sexual abuse occurs when the act is intentional and is committed either by: Physical force, violence, threat, or intimidation; Ignoring the objections of another person; Causing another’s intoxication or impairment through the use of drugs or alcohol; Taking advantage of another person’s incapacitation, state of intimidation, helplessness, or other inability to consent. 1. 
SAP appeal form with type of suspension indicated per your BisonWeb account, 

2. 
Detailed type-written narrative of what led to your suspension status, and explanation of what you intend to do to improve your plan of action, and: 

3. 
Copies of all supporting documentation attached. 





Mitigating circumstances may include, but are not limited to extreme illness or injury, family crisis, or death of an immediate relative. The circumstances must be documented and will not be considered for approval without the supplemental documentation attached. Examples of documentation include medical documentation, birth or death certificates, etc. Please do not submit letters of stipulation from your school/college along with your appeal documents. If at the end of an academic school year, you have found yourself to be suspended, you may appeal to have your current SAP status reviewed by attending a summer session at Howard University and increasing your GPA or earned credits and then appealing once those grades have been submitted to the Office of the Registrar. It will not be until the summer courses are updated to your account that an evaluation of your courses can be made. Please monitor your BisonWeb account for appropriate updates as well as the email address you have provided on your appeal form. Summer credits will count toward determining your maximum eligibility for the next school year. You must complete the appeal process at the end of the summer term. Summer credits will count toward determining your maximum eligibility for next school year. 
Once your appeal has been received and reviewed by the Appeals Committee, you will receive written notification of the committee's decision by email to the address you have provided in your appeal packet. You will also notice the appropriate changes made to your award package on your BisonWeb account. Note: All incomplete appeals will be denied. All appeal decisions are final and the submission of a SAP appeal does not guarantee reinstatement of aid eligibility. Students who are currently SAP suspended are strongly advised to create alternate financial plans in the event your appeal is denied. 
Additional SAP Requirements 
If you are listed as being SUSPENDED FROM THE UNIVERSITY, the appeal process is two-fold. Step 1: You must appeal to your school/college as well as Step 2: the Office of Financial Aid. It is your responsibility to stay abreast of deadlines. Stipulation letters do notensure financial aid reinstatement and one is not contingent upon the other. For further inquiries please contact the Office of Financial Aid at http://www.howard.edu/financialaid/contacts/staff-finaid.htm 
Although you may not be receiving financial aid, you will be evaluated for financial aid eligibility on the same basis as students who receive federal and state aid. Should you apply for aid, your eligibility will be based on your prior academic performance at Howard University. 
• 
If you are enrolled in a dual degree program, you may appeal for an extension of the maximum time frame provision of this policy. 

• 
If you are an undergraduate student pursuing a second degree, you may attempt an additional 48 credit hours to complete your second degree program, including prerequisite courses. Graduate/professional students may attempt an additional 24 credit hours 


b.) The Howard University student identification card shall be carried by students at all times and surrendered upon the reasonable request of any University Official, Faculty Member, Staff Member and all Residence Hall Personnel. 
Failure to comply with any disciplinary procedure, within the identified time frame, will result in a hearing with sanctions applied. 
14. Smoking Smoking is prohibited in all University buildings and residence halls. 
15. Disruptive Conduct a.) Acting in a manner that impairs, interferes with, or obstructs the orderly conduct, processes, or functions of the University or of any person or persons on University owned or operated property or at any University-sponsored event. b.) Students whose behavior, communications, and/or attire may be considered disruptive while participating in academic programs, University activities, programs and general operations. Behaviors would include: use of electronic devices such as pagers, cell phones, video games, walkmans, personal music players, playing computer games during class sessions, laboratory or clinical practicum’s or clerkships and periods of academic instruction, remediation, or tutorial assistance. Disruptive conduct would also include the wearing of apparel or clothing in class, or during academic instruction that is lewd, profane or sexually explicit; attire that conveys messages in print or in picture form that are profane, vulgar, patently offensive, racist or discriminatory, and this conduct disrupts the instructor’s ability to maintain decorum or provide academic instruction in the classroom, laboratory, or other instructional environments. This also includes students who engage in disruptive behaviors or communications with an instructor, such as swearing or cursing, which impedes the ability of the instructor to present academic information in the classroom or laboratory, clerkship, conduct academic advisement, counseling, or tutorial assistance. c.) Students are required to carry the Howard University student identification card at all times and are required to surrender it upon reasonable request by any University Official, Faculty Member, Staff Member and all Residence Hall Personnel. 
16. Electronic Communication Using University telecommunications, data communication networks or any electronic means owned and operated by the University for illegal or improper purposes or in violation of University regulations and policies, or related federal, state, or local laws. 
17. Harboring Harboring is knowingly allowing any fugitive from justice, or any student, employee, or any other individual who has been barred from the University, to stay in, or to be transported onto, University owned or operated property or facilities. This would also include harboring any individual who is considered to be a fugitive from justice or for whom there is an outstanding warrant. 
18. Contracts Students as individuals or representatives of student organizations are prohibited from entering into verbal or written agreements or contracts that purport to bind, obligate, or create liability of any kind for Howard University. The University will hold all such students individually liable for any financial or legal consequences or damages that may result from such unauthorized actions. 
19. Established Policies And Procedures The failure to observe any provision of the University Code of Ethics and Conduct, the Student Code of Conduct, the Academic Code of Conduct, the H-Book, the University Web-site or appropriate school/college bulletin, pertaining to personal conduct or behavior. 
20. Violation Of Criminal Codes Of the Local, State, or Federal Governments On or off-campus actions or activities that violate criminal law also violate the Code. 
21. Embezzlement Unauthorized acquisition and/or use of funds belonging to, or under the stewardship of, any University unit, organization, or individual. 
22. Contempt Of, Or Interference With, Any Disciplinary Program Actions Or Activities Failure to respect the disciplinary program or process, including failing to appear for a meeting or hearing if requested to do so, interfering with attendance by any person or persons mandated to attend a meeting or hearing, or interfering with the hearing or disciplinary process of any disciplinary board or administrative hearing. Acting in a threatening or harassing manner towards hearing participants before, during or after a hearing. 
23. Media Contact Students are expressly prohibited from speaking on behalf of, or for, Howard University with any media organization or publication, or from inviting the same to any University-owned or operated property, facility, or event without the express written permission of the Office of University Communications. 
24. Presenting FalseTestimony Knowingly making false statements regarding a disciplinary matter before, during or after the disciplinary adjudication process. 

Section IX: University-Wide Disciplinary Hearing Boards and Hearings; Administrative Hearings and Officers; Appeals Hearings and Boards; Administrative Appeal hearings and Officers 
The adjudication of alleged violations of the Code is conducted by a duly appointed University-Wide Disciplinary Hearing Board, or by an Administrative Hearing Officer. 
The Dean of Special Student Services reserves the right to assign a case to a Disciplinary Hearing Board or to an Administrative Hearing Board. Those cases involving charges which may result in possible indefinite suspension, withdrawal or expulsion will be remanded to a Disciplinary Hearing Board. 
1. Disciplinary Hearing Boards 
There shall be University-wide disciplinary hearing boards as follows: University-Wide Disciplinary Hearing Board for Undergraduate matters; University-Wide Appellate Board for Undergraduate matters; University-Wide Disciplinary Hearing Board for Graduate and Professional Student matters; University-Wide Appellate Board for Graduate and Professional Student matters. 
Members of the University-wide disciplinary hearing boards shall be selected from a pool of students, faculty members, and administrators trained by ODSSS. The pool of board members consists of those qualified appointees submitted by University officers, Deans of the schools and colleges, the Faculty Senate, ODSSS, the Howard University Student Association (HUSA), and any other undergraduate or graduate student governing bodies approved by the Vice President for Student Affairs. Organizations shall select potential appointees according to their internal policies and procedures. Volunteers may also be part of the pool if they meet the qualifications for the category of their status at the University and they submit the “Offer to Volunteer for University Disciplinary Program” form to ODSSS. ODSSS shall provide at least two written requests for names to officials and organizations. In the event that appointments are not made by the deadline by the appropriate student and faculty organizations, ODSSS shall appoint persons to the board pool from the faculty and student body, subject to the approval of the Vice President for Student Affairs. 
The disciplinary hearing boards have jurisdiction over all students subject to the Code. They are responsible for reviewing and evaluating all of the relevant information, conducting hearings, rendering a decision of “Responsible” or “Not Responsible” and making recommendations for sanctions, if any, to the Dean for Special Student Services. 
2. Disciplinary Hearing Board Membership 
The membership of the disciplinary hearing boards is as follows: Each board shall be comprised of seven (7) members. No more than three (3) members can be students who meet the qualifications outlined below. The remaining members shall be from the pool of qualified faculty and administrator appointees, or volunteers, who meet the qualifications outlined below. 
A minimum of five (5) members will constitute a quorum. 
A. Undergraduate Students: 
Validated for the semester(s) of service. In good academic, disciplinary and financial standing. At least 24 credits earned at time of appointment. Can serve for two (2) academic years or until graduation. 
B. Graduate/Professional Students: 
Validated for the semester(s) of service. At least one (1) semester of enrollment by the time of appointment. In good academic, disciplinary, and financial standing. 
C. Faculty: 
Must have been a member of the University faculty for a minimum period of one (1) year at the time of appointment. 
Administrator/Staff: 
Must have been an employee of the University for a minimum of one (1) year at the time of appointment. 
F. Chair: 
The Dean for Special Student Services shall appoint a faculty member or administrative staff member of each board to act as Chair. 
3. Administrative Hearings 
Resolution of a violation of the Code may also be handled through an administrative hearing process conducted by an Administrative Hearing Officer rather than through a judicial board. An administrative hearing may be used under any of the following circumstances: A student charged with a violation will be assigned to the administrative hearing process, unless the violation merits indefinite suspension, withdrawal or expulsion. 
The Dean for Special Student Services determines that it is not possible or practical to convene a disciplinary hearing board or appeal board at the time the case is scheduled (e.g., summer sessions, semester breaks, lack of a quorum, spring break, etc.) and that it is in the University’s best interest to have the case heard expeditiously. 
The nature of the case is such that the Dean for Special Student Services believes the best interest of the student and/or the University would be served by the use of an Administrative Hearing. If the Complainant or the Accused Student objects, either may appeal this decision in writing to the Vice President for Student Affairs, within ten (10) business days following notice of the Administrative Hearing. The Vice President shall render a decision within three (3) business days. The Dean for Special Student Services reserves the right to determine which cases are to be heard by a University-wide Disciplinary Hearing Board. In most cases, the use of an Administrative Hearing Officer is prescribed. In cases, which could result in the indefinite suspension or expulsion of a student, a University-wide Disciplinary Hearing Board is warranted. 
4. Administrative Hearing Officers 
Administrative Hearing Officers shall be selected by the Dean for Special Student Services from a pool of qualified and trained administrative staff members and faculty members. The Administrative Hearing Officer is responsible for reviewing all of the relevant information, conducting a hearing, rendering a decision, and making recommendations for sanctions, if any, to the Dean for Special Student Services. The hearing officer shall be the sole judge of the relevancy and admissibility of evidence presented for consideration. 
5. Appeal Boards 
Any student found “Responsible” for violating the Code by a University-Wide Disciplinary Hearing Board or Hearing Officer and, thereby subject to sanctions, may appeal the decision. (See Section XVI: Appeal of a Disciplinary Hearing Decision). A request for reconsideration of a decision or recommended sanction(s) shall be submitted by the Dean for Special Student Services to the appropriate Appeal Board. 
Each Appeal Board shall be comprised of five (5) members. No more than two (2) members shall be qualified students. The remaining members shall be qualified faculty members, administrator appointees or volunteers. 
Members of the Appeal boards must meet the same qualification standards as members of the University-Wide Disciplinary Hearing Board. However, a member serving on a University-Wide Disciplinary Hearing Board shall not serve on an Appeal Board on the same case. A faculty member or administrator who is a member of the board will be appointed by the Dean for Special Student Services to serve as Chair of each Appeal Board. A majority of four (4) will constitute a quorum. 
6. Administrative Appeal Hearing 
An appeal of a decision by a University-Wide Disciplinary Hearing Board may be handled through an administrative hearing process by an Administrative Appeal Hearing Officer rather than through an Appeal Board. An administrative Appeal Hearing will be convened at the discretion of the Dean for Special Student Services. If the Accused Student objects, she/he may appeal this decision in writing within five (5) business days to the Vice President for Student Affairs. The Vice President will render a decision within three (3) business days. In addition, a student filing an appeal may elect to request such a hearing. 
7. Administrative Hearing Appeal Officers 
Administrative Appeal Hearing Officers are selected and trained by the Dean for Special Student Services. The Administrative Appeal Hearing Officer is responsible for meeting with the Chairperson of the University-wide Disciplinary Hearing Board, reviewing all documents from the case file and hearing, and for conducting the appeal hearing. The Officer shall be the sole judge of the relevancy and admissibility of evidence presented for consideration. The qualifications for an Administrative Appeal Hearing Officer shall be the same as for an Administrative Hearing Officer. The Administrative Hearing Appeal Officer shall have no engagement in the pending appeal brought for his review. 

Section X: Hearing Particulars 
1. 
Notification of Hearing The ODSSS shall notify the members of the appropriate Disciplinary Hearing Board (or the hearing officer, as appropriate), the Accused Student(s), and the Complainant(s), in writing, of the date, place and time of a scheduled hearing not less than ten (10) working days prior to the hearing date (excluding holidays). Both the Complainant(s) and the Accused Student(s) shall be informed that they are responsible for contacting their own witnesses, informing them of the hearing, and ensuring their attendance at the hearing. Such notification shall be hand-delivered, mailed, or delivered to the local address of record. Witness lists are to be submitted to ODSSS at least two (2) days prior to the hearing. Upon request, ODSSS will make copies of the witness lists available to the parties. Upon request, ODSSS will provide letters for professors of students absent from class due to participation in a disciplinary procedure to explain the students’ absence from class. 

2. 
Notification of Inability to Attend a Hearing If either the Accused Student(s) or the Complainant(s) cannot attend a scheduled hearing due to compelling circumstances, he/she must notify ODSSS as soon as this fact is known. Written documentation of extenuating circumstances must be provided. Failure to adhere to this policy may result in additional disciplinary action and/or conducting the proceeding without the benefit of the absent person’s participation. 

3. 
Document Access The Accused Student(s) and complaining student(s) shall have reasonable access to all of the relevant case documents that are maintained by the ODSSS. Documents shall also be available to members of the boards or hearing officers for review prior to a hearing. The documents prepared by ODSSS and submitted during the hearing, as well as the statements given, will constitute the record of the board or of the hearing officer in an administrative hearing. 

4. 
Briefings and Consultations Board chairs, board members, and hearing officers may be briefed by ODSSS on factual and procedural matters. Legal advice will be provided to such individuals by the Office of General Counsel. 

5. 
Failure to Attend A student accused of violating the Code, who has received appropriate notification to attend a scheduled hearing but fails to do so, may be considered in contempt of the disciplinary process and subject to further disciplinary action by the Dean for Special Student Services. The board or hearing officer may elect to proceed with the hearing without the Accused Student(s) and render a decision based on the evidence presented. A witness, who is called by ODSSS or a Hearing Officer, with evidence critical to the resolution of a violation of the Code given reasonable notification of a hearing who refuses to attend may be considered in contempt of the disciplinary process and subject to possible disciplinary action. 

6. 
Rules of Evidence and Legal Representation Howard University’s disciplinary proceedings are not subject to the formal rules of process, procedure, and/or technical rules of evidence, such as are applied in criminal or civil court. Rather, boards and administrative hearing officers shall make a determination based on whether the record makes it more likely than not that the charges are true. The Accused Student(s) and the Complainant(s) may consult with their personal legal counsel in preparation for a hearing; however, attorneys are not allowed to attend a disciplinary hearing or to represent a student at a hearing. A student may elect to have a peer advisor, at a hearing, who shall serve in an advisory capacity only. Advisors are not permitted to speak or to participate directly in the hearing. Peer advisors must be current students in good academic, disciplinary and financial standing with the University. 


7. 
Scope of Evidence Considered In a Disciplinary Action The Board Chair or Administrative Hearing Officer shall be the sole judge of the relevancy and admissibility of evidence presented for consideration. 



Section XI: Procedures for Conducting a Disciplinary Hearing 
1. 
Closed Hearings All hearings are closed, except to those persons directly involved (board members, Complainant(s), the Accused Student(s), and witnesses), unless the board determines otherwise. 

2. 
Witnesses In those situations when a Howard University Police Department Officer(s) may have taken a report and/or investigated an incident relevant to the proceeding, ODSSS, the Complainant or the Accused Student may request that the Officer attend and/or participate in a hearing as a witness. Such attendance or participation will be permitted if it is determined by the Board or Hearing Officer that the HUPD Officer’s presence will facilitate the finding of facts. The Complainant or the Accused Student should contact University Police directly to make such a request and, at the same time, notify ODSSS of the request. Only those persons with direct knowledge of the incident shall be allowed to appear as witnesses. No character witnesses are allowed. 

3. 
Postponement A one-time request for postponement by either the Accused Student or the Complainant(s) may be considered by ODSSS, and granted only when ODSSS determines that there is a compelling reason for the delay. ODSSS will set a new date for the hearing and notify all parties involved. Further requests for postponement do not have to be considered and a hearing may be held in the absence of either party. 

4. 
Quorum Requirement Five (5) members of appointed board members shall constitute a quorum necessary to conduct business, including receiving evidence and rendering a decision. Only members present may vote. 

5. 
Role of the Chair The Chair of a disciplinary board has the responsibility of conducting the hearing in a fair and equitable manner, and of taking such action as necessary to sanction or mitigate disruptive or inappropriate behavior. 

6. 
Burden of Proof The Complainant carries the burden of proof to establish the guilt of the Accused Student. The Accused Student should be prepared to respond to charges against him/her with witnesses and/or documents, as appropriate. 

7. 
Steps in the Hearing Each hearing shall follow a standardized format. Copies of the Procedures for Conducting a Disciplinary Hearing may be secured from ODSSS. 

8. 
Deliberation, Decision Making, and Reporting Results to ODSSS Deliberations shall be conducted only with board members, University counsel, and ODSSS staff present. 


Boards shall consider only such information as may constitute the record. Determinations as to responsibility for violations of the Code and recommended sanctions shall be made by a simple majority vote of the Board, except that recommended sanctions of suspension and expulsion require a two-thirds vote. 
The Chair of the board shall prepare a written report of the hearing finding(s), including the basis(es) for the finding(s) and shall submit it to ODSSS within ten (10) days of the hearing. When there is a finding that the Accused Student is “Responsible” for violating the Code, there shall be recommendations for sanctions. The Chair signs the report on behalf of the board. ODSSS will provide notification to the Accused Student and Complainant of the board’s determination. 
Sensitive information considered by the Dean of Special Student Services or his/her designee to determine sanctions shall be deemed confidential and will not be shared with students, except that upon written request from any alleged victim of a crime of violence or no forcible sex act, the result of the University’s disciplinary proceedings against the accused student will be disclosed. 

Section XII: Procedures for Conducting a Hearing by an Administrative Hearing Officer 
1. 
Closed Hearings All hearings are closed to anyone other than those persons directly involved, ODSSS staff, University counsel, the Complainant, the Accused Student, and witnesses unless the hearing officer determines otherwise. 

2. 
Witnesses Only those persons with direct knowledge of the incident shall be allowed to appear as witnesses. Those attesting to character alone are not allowed to serve as witnesses. A list of any witnesses speaking on behalf of the Accused Student or Complainant must be submitted to the Office of the Dean for Special Student Services not later than two (2) days prior to the hearing. 

3. 
Postponement A one-time request for postponement may be considered and granted by ODSSS only when it determines that there is a compelling reason for the delay. In that event, ODSSS will set a new date for the hearing and notify all parties involved. 

4. 
Role of the Administrative Hearing Officer The Administrative Hearing Officer is responsible for conducting the hearing in a fair manner and for recommending such action(s) as necessary to sanction or control disruptive or inappropriate behavior. 

5. 
Burden of Proof The Complainant has the burden of proof to establish that the Accused Student violated the Code. The Accused Student should be prepared to respond to charges and evidence presented against him/her with documents and/or witnesses, as appropriate. 

6. 
Steps in the Hearing Hearings shall follow a standardized format. Copies of the procedures may be obtained from ODSSS. 

7. 
Deliberation, Decision Making, and Reporting Results to ODSSS The Administrative Hearing Officer shall consider all information in the record. The Hearing Officer shall prepare a written report including any recommended sanctions, and submit the report to ODSSS within five [5] days of the hearing. ODSSS shall notify the Accused Student and the Complainant of the Hearing Officer’s determination. 


Sensitive information considered to determine sanctions by the Dean of Special Student Services or designee shall be deemed confidential and will not be shared with students, except upon written request from any alleged victim of a crime of violence or non-forcible sex act, the results of the University’s disciplinary proceedings against the accused student will be disclosed. 

Section XIII: Notification of Hearing Outcome 
The Dean for Special Student Services shall review the recommendations of the Board or Administrative Hearing Officer and shall make a final determination on sanctions. ODSSS shall then prepare a written memorandum setting forth the decision and any sanctions and notify both parties within twenty (20) working days after receipt of the report. ODSSS reserves the right to delay notification when it determines that such delay is in the best interest of the University. 
When deemed necessary or appropriate by ODSSS, it shall notify relevant University officers, officials, units and organizations of hearing outcomes and sanctions. 

Section XIV: Disciplinary Sanctions 
The purpose of disciplinary sanctions for violations of the Code is to educate students about responsible behavior as members of the Howard University community, to maintain order, and to protect the rights of others. 
Students found “Responsible” for violating the Code are notified of any sanctions by ODSSS, which also monitors compliance with the sanction. There is no set sanction for any particular offense, with the exception of automatic expulsion for a felony conviction. Disciplinary Hearing Boards and Administrative Hearing Officers evaluate each case individually. Sanctions will be determined individually and should reflect the nature and severity of the offense. 
1. General Terms 
Parents of minor or dependent students who receive a disciplinary sanction may be notified of that action by the University. 
The University reserves the right to apply any sanction for a violation of the Code that, in its sole discretion, appropriately addresses the gravity and frequency of the offense. One or more sanctions may be imposed for any offense. Prior offenses are cumulative and any student found guilty of the same offense or a second offense of equal or greater magnitude, may be suspended or expelled from the University. However, evidence of prior violations of the Code may be considered after a determination of “Responsible” has been made as part of the process of determining sanctions. Sanctions are imposed under the Code without regard to student classification, prospective graduation date, the time in the semester or term when the violation occurs, scholarship status, or any other factor. 
Students who have not completely fulfilled their sanctions may be allowed to participate in General Mandatory Registration for the subsequent semester if all other financial and academic conditions have been met. However, their registration will be canceled if they fail to comply with all the stipulations of the sanctions within the time limit set. The imposition of sanctions will be a matter of record in the ODSSS. 
2. Types of Disciplinary 
Sanctions One or more of the following sanctions may be imposed for any violation of the Code. The failure to perform a sanction, as directed, can lead to the imposition of more severe sanctions, up to and including suspension or expulsion. 
The identified sanctions do not represent the full range of sanctions which may be imposed against a student found “Responsible” for a violation of the Code. 
Disciplinary Warning or Reprimand 
A disciplinary warning or reprimand is an official written statement of censure. It is used when a student’s behavior is unacceptable but is considered to be minor and/or unintended. It includes a warning that any other violation of the University’s Code for which the student is found guilty will result in more severe disciplinary action. The written statement shall be delivered to the student. 
Letter of Apology to the Aggrieved Party 
A student may be required to write a letter of apology to the aggrieved party. A draft copy of the letter must be provided to ODSSS for prior approval. 
Requirement to Seek Counseling 
This sanction may be imposed when a student is found guilty of engaging in disrupting or uncivil behaviors. In such case, the student shall be required to provide evidence to ODSSS of attendance and completion of counseling by a qualified professional. 
Participation In, or Conducting, Special Workshops, Classes or Seminars 
A student may be required to participate in, or to develop, advertise and present special workshops or seminars related to a Code violation. In such a case, the student may be required to present a typed summary of the activity to the ODSSS. 
Research Assignments 
A student may be required to complete a research assignment on a topic related to the Code violation within a specified deadline. 
Mandatory University or Community Service 
A student may be required to perform work assignments at the University or in the local community. 
Restitution 
Restitution is reimbursement to compensate for personal injury, property damage, or misappropriation of University or other personal property. It may be in the form of money or services, subject to the discretion of the Hearing Officer or Disciplinary Hearing Board. 
Disciplinary Probation 
Disciplinary probation may be imposed for a specified period of time. A student who is under disciplinary probation will not be permitted to participate in intramural, intercollegiate or club sports, or student clubs and organizations. Such a student may not represent the University in any public function, competition, or performance, hold office in a student organization, or be eligible to join a fraternity or sorority. 
Students receiving scholarships for any activities enumerated above may have that scholarship suspended or terminated. Decisions regarding scholarships will be made by the Vice President for Student Affairs in consultation with the Dean for Special Student Services and other appropriate University officials. 
Limited Term Suspension 
A suspension is appropriate in cases of serious misconduct or in cases when a student has violated a condition of disciplinary probation or has failed to meet the stipulations of lesser sanctions. A student may be suspended from the University for the remainder of the semester, or summer session, in which the sanction is applied, or any portion thereof, for the next semester, or for any other additional periods determined appropriate by the University. 
Suspensions are recorded on the student’s permanent record (official transcript). Students suspended from the University are required to return their student identification cards, room keys and other University property and shall be barred from the campus for the duration of their suspension. Exceptions may be granted to this prohibition by ODSSS if it first determines that the barred student must enter University property for the purpose of conducting official business. If a student returns to the campus without permission during the period of suspension, his or her eligibility to be re-admitted to Howard University is jeopardized and such persons may also be charged with unlawful entry and, thereby, made subject to arrest. 
Indefinite Suspension 
Indefinite Suspension provides for all conditions described in Limited Term Suspensions but does not give a specific date for the consideration of readmission of the suspended student. This sanction is used in cases of extremely serious misconduct when evidence of rehabilitation must be presented by the student and accepted by the Vice President for Student Affairs before the student is readmitted to the University. 
Expulsion 
Expulsion is the most severe sanction that the University may impose. Expulsion is permanent dismissal from the University. In addition, the student is not eligible for readmission to the University and permanently barred from Howard University owned or operated property and from all Universitysponsored events. Students expelled from the University are required to return any student identification cards, room keys, and other University property and must leave campus immediately upon notification of being expelled. If an expelled student returns to the campus, he or she will be charged with unlawful entry and may be arrested. An expelled student’s relationship with the University is severed permanently. 

Section XV: Procedure for Readmission after Disciplinary Suspension 
A student temporarily suspended will be considered for readmission only after the student submits a Request for Readmission After Disciplinary Suspension form to the Office of the Dean for Special Student Services. 
ODSSS shall inform University officers or officials, including the appropriate academic and administrative Deans, the Vice President for Student Affairs, the Office of the Provost, the Office of the Senior Vice President for Health Affairs, the Office of General Counsel and the Office of the President of the disposition of the matter. 

Section XVI: Appeal of a Disciplinary hearing Decision 
1. 
Criteria for an Appeal A finding of responsibility for violations of the Code and/or the sanctions imposed may be appealed. However, an appeal will result in a reversal or modification of a decision only if one of the following criteria is met. It should be noted that an appeal is not an opportunity to have a new hearing on the matter. As described below, an appeal can only be used to reverse an error or to consider important information that was not available at the hearing. 1. 
Process 1. 
An important procedure leading up to or during the original hearing was ignored or so flawed that the hearing was not fair and impartial. 




2. 
Substantive Error 1. 
There was an error in identifying or interpreting the controlling and relevant University policy or standard of conduct and this substantially affected the hearing and resulted in the Accused Student(s) being denied a fair hearing outcome. 




3. 
New Evidence 1. 
Relevant new evidence has surfaced that could have materially affected the decision or finding of the board or hearing officer. This evidence must be produced and substantiated or documented and it is required that proof be provided that this information was not available at the time of the hearing. 




4. 
Disproportionate Sanction 1. 
The sanction levied is manifestly unjust because it is overtly disproportionate to the offense. 







2. 
Process for Filing an Appeal of Disciplinary Action An Appeal of Disciplinary Action form must be submitted to ODSSS by the student found “Responsible” within five (5) working days of receipt of the letter of notice of hearing outcome. The form should be typewritten or printed very legibly, with an attached statement not more than five double-spaced pages in length. The statement must clearly specify the grounds on which the appeal is being made and have attached any supporting documentation. Each case may be appealed only once. 

3. 
Appeal Review Process The written appeal must be submitted to ODSSS. ODSSS will forward the appeal to the Chair of the appropriate Appeal Board. The Chair shall have the authority to determine if the appeal could reasonably be expected to meet at least one of the four stated criteria. If the Chair so rules, he/she will set up an appeal hearing and notify the parties of its date, time, and location. If ODSSS determines that an Appeal Board cannot be convened, (e.g., between semesters or at the end of a semester or lack of quorum), it will appoint an Administrative Appeal Officer to review the matter, determine if a hearing is warranted, schedule a hearing, and notify the student. 

4. 
Appeal Hearing Appeal hearings will be limited to a presentation of evidence by the appellant that directly addresses the grounds for an appeal. The Chair of the University-Wide Judicial Board may be asked to attend, but no witnesses may be called. Appeal hearings will follow a standardized format. 

5. 
Remedies on Appeal The following actions may be taken by a majority vote of the Appeal Board members present and constituting a quorum, or by the Administrative Appeals Officer, transmitting a recommendation to the Dean of Special Student Services: 1. 
Affirm the findings of the original Board or Hearing Officer. 

2. 
Affirm the findings, but change the sanction(s) levied. 

3. 
Overturn the finding of the original Board or Hearing Officer and remand to the original Board for a new hearing. 




6. 
Notification of Finding The results of an appeal review will be sent by the Chair, who will forward the recommendation to ODSSS within twenty (20) working days of the Board’s decision. Within five (5) working days, ODSSS will inform the student who initiated the appeal and the Complainant of the Board’s decision. For cause, the Dean may grant the Chair an extension. If the case is remanded for a new hearing, ODSSS will contact the student about that new hearing. At the discretion of the Dean for Special Student Services, a different University-Wide Disciplinary Hearing Board may be asked to hear the case. 

7. 
Limitations 1. 
Each case may be appealed only once. Therefore the finding of the designated Appeal Board is final and binding. 

2. 
Only the Accused Student may file an appeal. 

3. 
Appeals filed after the stated deadline will not be considered, except in compelling circumstances as determined by the Dean for Special Student Services. 




8. 
Stay of Sanction(s) During the Appeal Process The Dean for Special Student Services will determine if the sanction(s) imposed on an appellant will stay pending the appeal process. 



Section XVII: Revisions of the Student Code of Conduct and Judiciaries 
1. 
Periodic Review The ODSSS will conduct a full formal review of the Code at least every five (5) years or at such other times as it deems appropriate to determine if the Code should undergo a full revision process. 

2. 
Procedure for Revision If it is determined that the Code is in need of full revision, the procedure for developing a new document for recommendation to the Board of Trustees will be as follows: A committee composed of faculty, administrative staff and students will be appointed by ODSSS to review the “Code” portion of the document and to make recommendations for changes. The pool of those eligible to serve will come from names submitted by University officers, Deans of the schools and colleges, the Faculty Senate, the Howard University Student Association (HUSA), and other authorized and approved undergraduate and graduate student governing bodies using their own internal policies for such selections. In the event that after appropriate notice, names are not submitted, ODSSS shall make appointments. The draft of the revised Code is completed by ODSSS and forwarded to the Vice President for Student Affairs, the Provost, and the Senior Vice President for Health Affairs for review and comment. An open forum for students, appropriately advertised, will be held to allow for discussion of proposed changes to the Code. Comments and concerns will be considered in completing the final draft. The final draft will be submitted for review to the General Counsel. 

3. 
Forwarding for Approval The final document will be authored by ODSSS and forwarded, through the Vice President for Student Affairs, the Provost, and the Senior Vice President for Health Affairs to the President for final review and for presentation to the Board of Trustees for consideration. 

4. 
Amendments Amendments to the Code deemed necessary by the Dean for Special Student Services during periods between formal full reviews and revisions will be prepared by ODSSS and forwarded through the Vice President for Student Affairs, the Provost, the Senior Vice President for Health Affairs and General Counsel, to the President for approval and implementation. 


The Howard University Student Code of Conduct and Judiciaries Division of Student Affairs Office of the Dean for Special Student Services Howard University, Suite 725 Washington, DC 20059 

Academic Code of Student Conduct 
Approved by the Board of Trustees, June 29, 2010 
Howard University is a community of scholars composed of faculty and students both of whom must hold the pursuit of learning and search for truth in the highest regard. Such regard requires adherence to the goal of unquestionable integrity and honesty in the discharge of teaching and learning responsibilities. Such regard allows no place for academic dishonesty. To better assure the realization of this goal any student enrolled for study at the University may be disciplined for the academic infractions defined below. 
Definitions of Academic Infractions: 
Academic Cheating—any intentional act(s) of dishonesty in the fulfillment of academic course or program requirements. This offense shall include (but is not limited to) utilization of the assistance of any additional individual(s), organization, document, or other aid not specifically and expressly authorized by the instructor or department involved. 
(Note: This infraction assumes that with the exception of authorized group assignment or group takehome assignments, all course or program assignments shall be completed by an individual student only without any consultation or collaboration with any other individual, organization, or aid.) 
Plagiarism— to take and pass off intentionally as one’s own the ideas, writings, etc. of another without attribution (without acknowledging the author). 
Copy Infringement—Copy infringement occurs when a copyrighted work is reproduced, distributed, performed, publicly displayed, or made into a derivative work without the permission of the copyright owner. 
Administration of the Code 
This Academic Code of Student Conduct applies in all schools and colleges. In professional schools and colleges that have adopted honor codes, the honor code may supersede this Code. The authority and responsibility for the administration of this Academic Code of Conduct and imposition of any discipline upon any particular student shall vest in the Dean and faculty of the School or College in which the student is enrolled but may be delegated by the faculty to the Dean of the School or College in which the student is enrolled. The Dean shall be assisted in this responsibility by any faculty members and administrative officers in the School or College the Dean shall consider appropriate. Any student accused of an infraction of this Code shall have a right to a limited hearing, as described herein, of the charges against him before a committee of faculty members, at least three in number, none of whom shall be the accuser or witness to the alleged infraction. The committee may be either a standing of the School or College, whose responsibilities are considered appropriate by the Dean to conduct a hearing under this code, or a committee appointed by the Dean for the special purpose of conducting only a particular hearing or all such hearings that may arise during an annual period. The hearing committee shall be chaired by a member designated by the Dean and the chairperson shall have the right to vote in cases of a tie vote. 
Procedure 
Any faculty member who has knowledge of an infraction of this Code shall assemble all supporting evidence and identify any additional witnesses to the infraction and make this information known to the Dean of the School or College in which the student is enrolled at least ten (10) business days after the date of the infraction. 
Upon being notified of an alleged infraction of this Code, the Dean shall, as soon as possible, consider the weight of the assembled evidence and, if the Dean considers the evidence sufficient to warrant further action the Dean shall notify the alleged offender of the charge(s) against him/her together with a designation of a hearing time and place where the accused may respond to the charge(s). The hearing date shall be no later than ten (10) business days after notification to the accused of the charge(s) against him/her. The Dean shall similarly notify the hearing committee members of the time and place of the hearing together with identification of the accuser and accused. 
The “limited hearing” authorized by this Code is not an adversarial proceeding. Constitutional principles of “due process” are not applicable to these proceeding. The faculty member concerned shall present the case for the University. Both shall be allowed to present witnesses and evidence in support of their positions concerning the charge(s). However, no legal counsel for either side shall be allowed. The members of the hearing committee may question the accused and the accuser and examine all evidence presented. The standard of proof for the proceeding under this Code shall be the standard of “substantial evidence.” The proceedings may be tape recorded but will not be transcribed. 
After the hearing of the charge(s) against the accused, the hearing committee shall, in closed session, vote by secret ballot to sustain or reject the charge(s). If the charges are sustained, the committee shall transmit the results and recommendation of the hearing committee to the Dean five (5) business days after the hearing. 
Upon receipt of the results and recommendations of the hearing committee, the Dean may sustain the recommendation of the Committee concerning the penalty or may reduce or increase the severity of the penalty, and shall, within five (5) business days, notify the student of the Dean’s determination. The student may appeal directly to the Provost and Chief Academic Officer or Senior Vice President for Health Sciences (Health Science students) for reconsideration of any disciplinary penalty. The student shall have five (5) business days to make such appeal from the date of receipt of notification. 
After hearing any appeal from a student, the Provost and Chief Academic Officer or Senior Vice President for Health Sciences shall make a decision that shall be communicated to the student within ten (10) business days. This decision shall be final. 
Penalties 
The minimum disciplinary penalty imposed upon a student found to have committed an infraction(s) of this Code shall be no credit for the course assignment or examination in which the infraction(s) occurred; however, a more severe penalty, such as failure in the course involved or suspension from the University, may be imposed depending upon the nature and extent of the infraction(s). 

Degree Revocation Procedures 
Adopted by the Board of Trustees (April 27, 1987) 
Scope — These procedures apply only to cases in which a University degree has been awarded but the record later shows: (1) the graduate’s academic record, following a correction, indicates the graduate fails to meet academic requirements for graduation; and (2) facts which, if known at the time of the awarding of a degree, would have resulted in a decision not to award the degree, without any further proceedings. 
Notice — The Dean of the School or College involved shall provide the graduate1 with written notice of: the University’s specific findings with regard to the graduate’s academic record and its intention to revoke the degree; the graduate’s opportunity to respond in order to present evidence that the record is incorrect; the graduate’s right to be represented or assisted in responding to the University’s findings, by other parties, including an attorney at the graduate’s expense; and a 60-day limit to respond to the notice. 
Review — In all cases where the graduate elects to respond to the University’s findings either in person or in writing, the following review procedures shall be used: 
A person designated by the Dean of the College or School in which the graduate was enrolled shall review the graduate’s evidence and the University’s evidence. 
The Dean’s designee, based upon his or her review of the evidence of record, shall submit to the Dean his or her written recommendation concerning revocation of the graduate’s degree. 
The Dean, based upon his or her review of the designee’s recommendation, shall submit to the appropriate Vice President his or her written recommendation concerning revocation of the graduate’s degree. 
The Vice President, based upon his or her review of the prior recommendations, shall forward the record and his or her recommendation to the General Counsel for review. 
The General Counsel, based upon his or her review of the record and prior recommendations, shall submit his or her recommendations, the record and all prior recommendations to the President for final action, subject to approval by the Board of Trustees. 
The Registrar shall provide the affected graduate with written notice, in the manner described in Section A, of the University’s final decision concerning revocation of the graduate’s degree. 
No Response Received — In cases where no response to the initial notice is received by the University after 60 days, the existing record shall be reviewed as noted above. Thereafter, the Associate Vice President for Enrollment Management shall provide the graduate with written notice in the manner described in Section A, of the University’s final decision concerning revocation of the graduate’s degree. 
Petition to Reopen Decision — The University shall allow any affected graduate to petition the University to reopen the revocation decision, provided the graduate establishes that he/she received notice after the 60-day limit or, for good cause shown, was unable to contact the University or to respond within the period specified. Any graduate who meets the above-noted requirements shall be provided an opportunity to respond and a review, in the manner described in Sections A and B. 
The term “graduate” refers to an individual who has received any degree from Howard University. A written notice shall be provided by: (1) certified mail, return receipt requested to the most recent permanent address contained in the graduate’s academic records; (2) regular first-class mail to the last known address locally; and (3) first-class mail to the last known address of the graduate’s parents or guardians. The written notice requirement applies in all cases, even though the address involved is the same. 

Policy on Student Academic Grievance Procedures 
Approved by the Board of Trustees (April 23, 1994) 
The Informal Process 
A student who believes that he/she has been aggrieved must first attempt to seek an informal resolution with the other party involved in the dispute, e.g., grade dispute with the instructor. If the student is unable to resolve the dispute with the primary party of the dispute, then the student is advised to seek the intervention of his or her department chairperson. 
All disputes which are not resolved at the departmental level are then brought to the Dean’s Office, whereupon the Dean or his designee will seek to reach an informal resolution through mediation between the parties. 
If the mediation at Dean’s level fails, then the student’s grievance is consigned to the committee designated by the school/college to address student grievances herein referred to as the Student Grievance Committee. 
The Formal Process 
Student grievances which are consigned to the Student Grievance Committee must be specified in writing and given to the Dean or his designee. A student’s written statement, along with supportive evidence, constitutes a case document, which will be submitted to deach member of the committee. The second party to the dispute is also requested to provide the Office of the Dean with his or her account of the matter in dispute which becomes a part of the case document that is forwarded to the committee. 
The Student Grievance Committee is then required to set a date for convening a meeting to hear the case(s) as expeditiously as possible. 
After the date has been set, each party to the dispute is sent a certified letter which informs him or her of the charges, and date of the meeting as well as a statement requesting his or her presence. During the hearing, the student presents his/her case; after, the accused party is allowed to present the other side. Each side is permitted to have witnesses. 
Following the hearing, members of the committee after deliberation on their assessment of the case reach a decision as to how the case should be resolved. 
The committee’s decision is sent to the Dean of the School/College in the form of a recommendation. The Dean then informs the student in writing of the decision, which may be based upon the committee’s recommendation or upon a modification of it. 

Policy Statement Concerning the Use of; the Possession for Sale, Transfer, or Exchange of; Controlled Substances 
Approved by the Board of Trustees (September 23, 1989) 
One among the most serious menacing phenomena facing urban communities in general and Black communities, in particular, is that of the ever-spreading use of controlled substances or illegal drugs. Attending this phenomenon is not only the debilitating effects on the human system but the many unsettling events which are inescapably its by-products. Howard University, as an urban institution and thus a part of the larger District of Columbia community, is not insulated against this problem and its accompanying or precipitating ills and recognizes that an effective response to this menace must be on a community-wide basis. 
Proper consideration of this subject must take into account and be addressed to those not yet involved as users or purveyors, those who may be helped through medically related therapy and treatment programs, and those who are engaged in the illegal possession, manufacture, transfer and/or sale of such items. 
For the past several years considerable effort has been directed toward acquainting the University community with this subject in its most salient aspects. With some exceptions, work in this area has been concerned primarily with the conduct of special educational programs. These efforts, with expansion and increased emphasis, will be continued. In addition, the University through the counseling Service, the Student Health Center, the Employee Health Unit and the Institute on Drug Abuse and Addiction, will make a major effort to marshal appropriate resources, on an interdisciplinary basis, to contribute to the campaign currently being waged against this destructive force. Thus, all of these University resources will be concerned with comprehensive drug prevention/treatment programs and services. 
Non-medically Prescribed Use of Drugs 
Howard University does not sanction the use of drugs that are not prescribed by authorized health professionals. It is strongly urged that persons who have not experimented with or made use of such substances should avoid their use at all costs. Science to date has made no showing or claim that such non-prescribed use is in any way medically beneficial. For individuals interested in this subject, educational materials are available at the Counseling Service, the Student Health Center, the Employee Health Unit and the Institute on Drug Abuse Addiction, as well as selected locations throughout the District of Columbia. Individuals with drug-related problems should seek professional help, without delay, from these University resources, where such assistance is handled with the utmost confidentiality. Students with drug problems or concerns in this area are encouraged to seek help from or visit these agencies without fear of punitive consequences such as disciplinary police actions or expulsion from school. 
Possession of Controlled Substances For Sale, Exchange, or Transfer, or The Sale, Exchange, Transfer or Manufacture of Controlled Substances 
The subject of individual involvement in the handling of illegal drugs is viewed by the University in an entirely different light. Federal and local laws make it abundantly clear that possession of controlled substances for the purpose of sale, exchange, or transfer as well as the manufacture, sale, transfer, or exchange of controlled substances are prohibited, and individuals responsible for violations of such laws are to be treated with severity. The University, as a part of the larger community, is similarly bound by law and of necessity and must act in similar fashion with offenders of its own regulations operative in this area. Although the University recognizes the need to provide a variety of remedial services to persons who fall victim to drugs, in the hope that causes of such problems can be removed; it does not intend to offer a haven for persons who intentionally violate its own standards of conduct or Federal and local laws dealing with this subject. 
Howard University views illegal conduct in this connection with complete seriousness and the urgency of the matter deserves the immediate attention of each individual. It should especially be noted in this regard that students engaged in illegal conduct of this type are subject to summary SUSPENSION, EXPULSION, and/or TERMINATION, aside from or in addition to penalties which may flow from court disposition of such matters. Persons not formally connected with the University but who nevertheless are involved in illegal drug activity on University premises will be subject to ARREST and PROSECUTION. Involvement with illegal drugs subjects a person to criminal penalties, including felony conviction and often times imprisonment. 
The University feels that each individual should give serious consideration to the possible permanent harm a conviction may do later in life. It is possible that the affected person will face the loss of many employees and citizenship privileges, such as professional licensing (law, medicine, certified public accountant, and the like), the right to vote and employment by governmental agencies and in many instances, private industry. 
For those who would require proof, it has been clearly demonstrated that neither slavery nor compulsory segregation succeeded in robbing our people of their potency. To now permit the drug menace to signal the demise of our people would be no more a tribute properly befitting the efforts of our ancestors and contemporaries who have labored long and hard in the vineyard toward total liberation than would it be a proper legacy for future generations of our youth. 

Equal Opportunity Grievance Procedures 
The Equal Opportunity Office is located in Room 108, C.B. Powell Building, (202) 806-5770. Following are the procedures to be followed in the resolution of equal opportunity complaints. It should be noted that work days, as defined hereinafter, exclude Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays observed by the University. 
Persons with equal opportunity complaints shall submit to the University’s Equal Opportunity Officer, within 20 calendar days of the day on which the event giving rise to the complaint occurs, a written statement which specifies the nature of their complaint and evidence to support their charge of illegal discrimination. 
The University’s Equal Opportunity Officer shall do the following: 
Within 3 work days after receipt of written complaint-arrange a conference with the complainant, secure any additional information or clarification needed from the complainant and secure a signed Complaint Withdrawal Form from complainants who wish to withdraw their complaints. Within 3 work days after the conference with pursuing complainants —forward to the concerned member of the Equal Opportunity Committee a copy of the written complaint and a written recommendation concerning salient points to be covered by the investigation. 
The concerned member of the Equal Opportunity Committee or his/ her designee shall do the following within 15 work days after receipt of written communication from the Equal Opportunity Officer: Conduct an investigation of the complaint. 
Submit a written report on finding and his/her decision of the Equal Opportunity Officer. 
The Equal Opportunity Officer, within 5 work days after receipt of written communication from the concerned member of the Equal Opportunity Committee, shall review the decision and findings and will do one of the following: 
1. 
Mail notification to the complainant at last address on record that the matter has been resolved in favor of the complainant. 

2. 
Mail notification to the complainant at last address on record that the matter has been referred to the Equal Opportunity Committee. 

3. 
The Equal Opportunity Officer will refer to the Chairman of the Equal Opportunity Committee copies of all correspondence relative to the complaint. 

4. 
The Chairman of the Equal Opportunity Committee, within 5 work days after receipt of written communication from the Equal Opportunity Officer, shall review the record and convene all available members of the Equal Opportunity Committee. 

5. 
Members of the Equal Opportunity Committee, exclusive of the concerned member of the Equal Opportunity Committee, shall review the record and reach a decision. The decision of the Committee shall be final and binding for the University. 

6. 
The Chairman of the Equal Opportunity Committee, within 5 work days after meetings of the Equal Opportunity Committee, shall notify in writing the University President, the concerned member of the Equal Opportunity Committee and the University’s Equal Opportunity Officer of the Committee’s decision and reasons for the decision. 


Immediately upon the receipt of the Committee’s decision, the Equal Opportunity Officer shall notify the complainant in writing about the decision. 


Degrees 
College of Arts & Sciences 
College of Arts & Sciences 
Military Science 
African Studies 
African Studies (B.A.) 
The Department of African Studies (DAS) provides an opportunity for Howard students to acquire an objective view of the present position of Africa in the modern (and changing) world, as well as an understanding of Africa's economic, social, and political problems. The department has adopted an interdisciplinary approach to the study of Africa at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. At the undergraduate level, the department educates students who wish to continue their studies in African affairs or are preparing to work in this field. 
*Except where noted, the elective requirements can be met by courses numbered from 000 to 299 that satisfy the degree credit hour requirement in consultation with an academic advisor. 
Type: B.A. 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
ENGW 104 
Writing, Literacy & Discourse 
3 
 
Mathematics Elec (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
3 
 
AFST 101/701 
3 
AFST 111 
African Systems of Thought 
3 
 
HHPL 159/160/175 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
AFST 106/776 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
HHPL 002/003/004 
1 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
African Studies Elective (Options: Courses under subject code AFST) 
3 
 
African Studies Elective (Options: Courses under subject code AFST) 
3 
AFST 156 
Introduction to African Literature 
3 
 
African Studies Elective (Options: Courses under subject code AFST) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Philosophy Elective - Choose between PHIL 051, 053, 055, 056, 057, or 059. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGW 105 
Reflective Writing and Portfolios 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
AFST 102 
Science, Technology, and African Development 
3 
 
African Studies Elective (Options: Courses under subject code AFST) 
3 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
AFST 110 
African Development and Underdevelopment 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
AFST 101/701 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Mathematics Elec (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
AFST 183 
Internship in African Studies 
3 
 
AFST 106/776 
3 
 
Minor Concentration (Options: Courses under subject code AFST) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*English Writing Course - Third writing class (Options: ENGL courses above 003). 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
AFST 182 
Seminar in Regional Studies 
3 
 
English Writing Course 
3 
 
Minor Concentration (Options: Courses under subject code AFST) 
3 
 
Minor Concentration (Options: Courses under subject code AFST) 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
122 
Category Descriptions 
Mathematics Elec (Options: Courses under code MATH) 

AFST 101/701 
Choose between AFST 101 OR AFST 701. 

HHPL 159/160/175 
Choose from HHPL 159, 160, 175 

AFST 106/776 
Choose between AFST 106 OR AFST 776. 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

HHPL 002/003/004 
Choose between HHPL 002, 003, OR 004. 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

African Studies Elective (Options: Courses under subject code AFST) 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Philosophy (Elective) 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Minor Concentration (Options: Courses under subject code AFST) 

English Writing Course 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW. 


Afro-American Studies 
Afro-American Studies (B.A) 
A major in Afro-American studies prepares students to understand the context and dynamics of the African American experience, past and present, gives you an introduction to the methods of the social sciences in a comparative, interdisciplinary context, and develops your abilities for graduate studies. You can choose from three areas of concentration. The political concentration includes an overview of the institution of human bondage, black political thought and activism in nineteenth-and twentieth-century America, and the political economies of contemporary Afro-Caribbean societies. A sociological concentration is based on the voluntary associations. The cultural concentration highlights the black experience in literature and popular culture. 
Type: B.A. 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGW 104 
Writing, Literacy & Discourse 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGW 105 
Reflective Writing and Portfolios 
3 
 
Speech 
3 
 
Math Elective 
3 
- 
4 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
AFRO Course (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
AFRO Course (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Minor Concentration (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor). 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
AFRO Course (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
AFRO Course (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
AFRO Course (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Minor Concentration (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Afro-American Cluster (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions | African-American Studies) 
3 
 
Physical Education (Swimming) - 1 cr 
1 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
AFRO 775 
Preparation for Practicum 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Minor Concentration (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
*General Elective (Courses level 000 to 299) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
AFRO 159 
Senior Seminar 
3 
AFRO 176 
Practicum/Internship in Afro American Studies 
6 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Minor Concentration (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
*General Elective (Courses level 000 to 299) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Speech 

Math Elective 
Choose between the following course offerings. 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 

AFRO Course (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Philosophy (Elective) 

Afro-American Cluster (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions | African-American Studies) 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 

Physical Education (Swimming) - 1 cr 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 


Art 
Art History 
Art History (B.A.) 
In addition to providing students with a broad understanding of world art, the Art History program focuses on African American art and the art of the African Diaspora. In beginning and advanced courses and seminars, students are encouraged to engage in scholarly investigation and analysis of visual styles, cultural movements, and social evidence in the history of art, especially original scholarship in African American and African Art History. The program’s strong research focus provides a virtual road map for students who wish to pursue careers as art historians in academia or in museums as curators and educators. 
Type: B.A. 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Freshman Composition (Courses under subject code ENGW) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
ARTF 087 
Two-Dimensional Concepts I 
3 
ARTF 089 
Three Dimensional Concepts I 
3 
ARTH 164 
Survey of Visual Art 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
ARTP 050 
Basic Black &White Photography 
3 
ARTH 165 
Introduction to Art History 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTP 031 
Printmaking I 
3 
ARTH 181 
Research in Art History I 
3 
ARTH 188 
Survey of African Art 
3 
ARTH 178 
African-American Art I 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTE 080 
Computers in the Arts 
3 
ARTH 172 
West African Art 
3 
ARTH 179 
African-American Art II 
3 
 
Art Elective 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Choose MUSC 100 or THSV 10 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
THSV 10 
Intro to Theater 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Art History Elective (Options: Courses under code ARTH) 
3 
 
Art History Elective (Options: Courses under code ARTH) 
3 
ARTH 170 
Modern Art History I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Choose MUSC 100 or THSV 10 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
THSV 10 
Intro to Theater 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Art History Elective (Options: Courses under code ARTH) 
3 
 
Art History Elective (Options: Courses under code ARTH) 
3 
ARTH 170 
Modern Art History I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
*University Elective (Courses level 000-299) 
**Art History Elective (Courses under code ARTH) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Univ. Elective or Art History Elective 
3 
 
Art History Elective (Options: Courses under code ARTH) 
3 
ARTH 168 
Internship in Art History 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Art History Seminar (Course under code ARTH) 
**Fine Arts Elective (Courses under code ARTH, ARTP, ARTF) 
***University Elective (Courses level 000 to 299) 
****Art History Elective (Courses under code ARTH) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Art History Seminar 
3 
 
Fine Arts Elective (3) 
3 
 
University Elective 
3 
 
Art History Elective (Options: Courses under code ARTH) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
121 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Art Elective 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Art History Elective (Options: Courses under code ARTH) 

Univ. Elective or Art History Elective 

Art History Seminar 

Fine Arts Elective (3) 

University Elective 


Ceramics 
Art - Ceramics Concentration (B.F.A.) 
The Ceramics Program provides students with a technical foundation in basic hand and wheel formation, glaze calculation, clay formulation, and a range of finishing and firing techniques. Advanced students are encouraged to explore the full range of possibilities in clay. The ceramics unit is designed to train students to become the traditional production potter; the ceramic sculptor and the visionary artists who want to combine and experiment with state of the arts ceramic materials and technology to create their visual voice 
Type: B.F.A. 
Type: 
B.F.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 002 
Freshman Composition 
3 
ARTF 087 
Two-Dimensional Concepts I 
3 
ARTF 089 
Three Dimensional Concepts I 
3 
ARTF 001 
Drawing I 
3 
ARTH 164 
Survey of Visual Art 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 003 
Freshman Composition 
3 
ARTF 088 
Two-Dimensional Concepts II 
3 
ARTF 090 
Three-Dimensional Concepts II 
3 
ARTF 002 
Drawing II 
3 
ARTH 165 
Introduction to Art History 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTC 121 
Ceramics I 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
ARTR 003 
Drawing III (Figure) 
3 
ARTA 011 
Painting I 
3 
ARTE 080 
Computers in the Arts 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTC 122 
Ceramics II 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
ARTR 004 
Drawing IV (Spatial Concepts) 
3 
ARTP 031 
Printmaking I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTC 123 
Ceramics III 
3 
ARTC 125 
Ceramics V 
3 
ARTS 141 
Sculpture I: Modeling and Casting 
3 
 
Art Elective 
3 
ARTH 178 
African-American Art I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTC 124 
Ceramics IV 
3 
ARTC 126 
Ceramics VI 
3 
ARTC 138 
Ceramics Sculpture 
3 
 
Art Elective 
3 
ARTH 179 
African-American Art II 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
ARTC 128 
Ceramics VIII 
3 
ARTC 129 
Ceramics IX 
3 
 
Art Elective 
3 
 
Art Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*University Elective (Courses level 000 to 299) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTC 130 
Ceramics X 
3 
ARTC 137 
Ceramic Sculpture workshop 
3 
 
Art Elective 
3 
 
Art Elective 
3 
 
University Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
121 
Category Descriptions 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Art Elective 

University Elective 


Design 
Art - Design Concentration (B.F.A) 
The goal of the Howard University Design Program is to develop an immense range of knowledge, skills and competencies in the area of visual communication through cross-curricular experiences. This is achieved through the study of theory and the practical application of learned techniques. This program reacquaints the student artist with foundation principles that are central to design. Through an intensive curriculum in visual and technologically-mediated communication students will learn how to identify, research, analyze, and solve problems at various levels, providing multiple solutions, mechanicals and prototypes. Students will also develop the ability to produce the following visual forms as solutions to studio and related real life problems: • two-dimensional • three-dimensional • printed • digital • motion • interactive Ideally, this program will cultivate competency in problem solving abilities, proficiency in conceptual skills and mastery of craftsmanship within each graduate. 
Type: B.F.A. 
*University Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
 
Type: 
B.F.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 002 
Freshman Composition 
3 
ARTF 087 
Two-Dimensional Concepts I 
3 
ARTF 089 
Three Dimensional Concepts I 
3 
ARTF 001 
Drawing I 
3 
ARTH 164 
Survey of Visual Art 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 003 
Freshman Composition 
3 
ARTF 088 
Two-Dimensional Concepts II 
3 
ARTF 090 
Three-Dimensional Concepts II 
3 
ARTF 002 
Drawing II 
3 
ARTH 165 
Introduction to Art History 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTD 105 
Typography I 
3 
ARTR 003 
Drawing III (Figure) 
3 
ARTP 050 
Basic Black &White Photography 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTD 108 
Typography II 
3 
ARTR 004 
Drawing IV (Spatial Concepts) 
3 
ARTP 063 
Digital Darkroom 
3 
ARTD 104 
Intro to Digital Design 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTD 106 
Design for Advertising I 
3 
ARTD 109 
Reproduction and Techniques 
3 
ARTD 115 
Digital Design I 
3 
ARTA 011 
Painting I 
3 
ARTH 178 
African-American Art I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTD 107 
Design for Advertising II 
3 
ARTD 111 
Illustration 
3 
ARTD 122 
Digital Design II 
3 
ARTD 119 
Internships 
3 
- 
6 
ARTH 179 
African-American Art II 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
ARTD 118 
Magazine and Newspaper Design I 
3 
ARTD 110 
Studio Problems in Design 
3 
ARTD 126 
Web. Dev. & Interactive Media 
3 
ARTD 112 
Production and Portfolio Techniques I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTD 123 
Magazine and Newspaper Design II 
3 
 
Art History Elective (Options: Courses under code ARTH) 
3 
 
Art Elective 
3 
ARTD 125 
Creative Business: Industry Prep. and Entrepreneurship 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
121 
Category Descriptions 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Art History Elective (Options: Courses under code ARTH) 

Art Elective 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 


Electronic Studio Art 
Art - Electronic Studio Concentration (B.F.A.) 
The Electronic Studio program is designed for students preparing for careers as web designers, two- and three-dimensional animators, special effect artists for TV and Film, product design, and motion graphics. The curriculum combines the fundamentals of visual arts: drawing, painting, illustration, and two-dimensional and three-dimensional design. Photography and video, with intensive applied computer technology and software techniques as applied to visual communications and design. Course work is designed to incorporate prerequisite visual arts courses to prepare students to be competitive in the visual arts and computer-aided art and design fields. 
Type: B.F.A. 
 
Type: 
B.F.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 002 
Freshman Composition 
3 
ARTF 087 
Two-Dimensional Concepts I 
3 
ARTF 089 
Three Dimensional Concepts I 
3 
ARTF 001 
Drawing I 
3 
ARTE 080 
Computers in the Arts 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 003 
Freshman Composition 
3 
ARTF 088 
Two-Dimensional Concepts II 
3 
ARTF 090 
Three-Dimensional Concepts II 
3 
ARTF 002 
Drawing II 
3 
ARTE 081 
Desktop Publishing 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Art Elective - Sculpture/Ceramics 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTH 164 
Survey of Visual Art 
3 
ARTE 082 
Presentation Graphics 
3 
ARTR 003 
Drawing III (Figure) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Art Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Art Elective - Design 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTH 165 
Introduction to Art History 
3 
ARTR 004 
Drawing IV (Spatial Concepts) 
3 
ARTP 050 
Basic Black &White Photography 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Art Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Choose between Div B/C 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTE 086 
Multi-Media I 
3 
ARTE 084 
Image Processing 
3 
ARTH 178 
African-American Art I 
3 
ARTE 095 
3D Modeling &Animation I 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTE 085 
Digital Photography 
3 
ARTE 087 
Multi-Media II 
3 
ARTE 083 
2D Animation I 
3 
ARTE 096 
3D Modeling &Animation II 
3 
ARTH 179 
African-American Art II 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
ARTE 093 
Internship 
3 
- 
6 
ARID 102 
Capstone Senior Project I 
3 
ARTE 091 
Independent Study I 
4 
 
University Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*ARTE 093 - Only 3 credit hours can be used towards degree requirements unless special permission is provided by the chair or program director. 
**Art Elective - Painting 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Art Elective 
3 
ARID 103 
Senior Workshop/Capstone II 
3 
ARTE 092 
Independent Study II 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Art Elective 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies C: Social Sciences (Open to Sophomores) 
AFRO 131 
Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
3 
AFRO 133 
Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
3 
AFRO 191 
Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
ANTH 120 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
3 
CLAS 110 
Blacks in Antiquity 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 199 
Introduction to Urban Economics 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
HIST 030 
Introduction to African History I 
3 
HIST 031 
Introduction to African History II 
3 
HIST 040 
Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
3 
HIST 041 
Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
3 
HIST 150 
Europe to 1815 
3 
HIST 051 
Introduction to European History II 
3 
POLS 003 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
3 
POLS 005 
Introduction to African Politics 
3 
POLS 011 
State and Local Government 
3 
POLS 143 
Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
3 

University Elective 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 


Fashion 
Art-Fashion Design Concentration (B.F.A.) 
The BFA in Design with a concentration in Fashion Design provides students with an overview of the fashion industry and the role of the consumer, with emphasis on product development. Students will explore fashion design in conjunction with the critical elements of design, forecasting, production, evaluation, branding, and sustainability of textiles, clothing, accessories, and home furnishings that globally bind consumers to products. 
Type: B.F.A. 
 
Type: 
B.F.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 002 
Freshman Composition 
3 
ARTF 087 
Two-Dimensional Concepts I 
3 
ARTF 089 
Three Dimensional Concepts I 
3 
ARTF 001 
Drawing I 
3 
ARTD 103 
Design History 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 003 
Freshman Composition 
3 
ARTF 088 
Two-Dimensional Concepts II 
3 
ARTF 090 
Three-Dimensional Concepts II 
3 
ARTF 002 
Drawing II 
3 
ARTH 165 
Introduction to Art History 
3 
ARTD 116 
History of Design II 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FASH 009 
Fashion Studio I 
3 
FASH 004 
Introduction to the Fashion Industry 
3 
FASH 124 
Textiles 
3 
FASH 163 
Fashion Illustration I 
3 
FASH 196 
Sustainability in the Fashion Industry 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTD 104 
Intro to Digital Design 
3 
FASH 162 
Fashion Studio II 
3 
FASH 164 
Fashion Illustration II 
3 
FASH 187 
Clothing and Human Behavior 
3 
FASH 174 
Fashion Industry II 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
HHPL 102 
Human Anatomy (Majors only) 
3 
FASH 172 
Fashion Studio III 
3 
FASH 186 
Clothing in History 
3 
 
PSYC 050 or SOCI 001 
3 
HHPL 108 
Human Anatomy Laboratory 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
FASH 184 
Fashion Studio IV: Autocad Apparel 
3 
FASH 168 
Practicum in Fashion Retailing 
4 
FASH 188 
Current Clothing Topics 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTD 112 
Production and Portfolio Techniques I 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
FASH 177 
Fashion in Context (Fashion Studio VI: Senior Collection Development) 
3 
ARTE 085 
Digital Photography 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Choose betweeen ARTD 125 or FASH 197. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTD 125 
Creative Business: Industry Prep. and Entrepreneurship 
3 
FASH 197 
Fashion Entrepreneurship 
3 
FASH 241 
Fashion Seminar (Senior Capstone) 
3 
FASH 198 
Study Travel Tour 
3 
FASH 193 
Fashion Marketing 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
PSYC 050 or SOCI 001 
Choose between PSYC 050: Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) (3crs) and SOCI 001: Introduction to Sociology (3crs). 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 


Interior Design 
Art - Interior Design Concentration (B.F.A.) 
The Interior Design program focuses on the function and quality of interior environments by considering aesthetic, technical, social and cultural aspects of the built environment. It emphasizes the development of the student’s ability to handle design concepts, space analysis and planning and knowledge of materials, furnishings and construction in order to produce interiors for residential, commercial and special uses. The program prepares the student for further study in interior design and equips them with the skills and knowledge to serve as corporate design team members. 
Type: B.F.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
 
Type: 
B.F.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 002 
Freshman Composition 
3 
ARTF 001 
Drawing I 
3 
ARTF 087 
Two-Dimensional Concepts I 
3 
ARTF 089 
Three Dimensional Concepts I 
3 
ARTH 164 
Survey of Visual Art 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 003 
Freshman Composition 
3 
ARTR 004 
Drawing IV (Spatial Concepts) 
3 
ARTF 088 
Two-Dimensional Concepts II 
3 
ARTF 090 
Three-Dimensional Concepts II 
3 
ARTD 104 
Intro to Digital Design 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INTD 098 
Environmental Factors of Interior Design 
3 
INTD 100 
Drafting Interior Design Communication 
3 
INTD 102 
History of Interiors & Architecture 
3 
INTD 106 
CAD for Interiors I 
3 
 
Digital Design I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INTD 104 
Construction of Interior Spaces 
3 
INTD 107 
CAD II 
3 
INTD 109 
Materials & Interior Specifications 
3 
INTD 110 
Presentation & Rendering Techniques 
3 
ARTH 170 
Modern Art History I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
INTD 111 
Interior Design I - Residential 
3 
INTD 113 
Interior Design II - Office 
3 
INTD 116 
Lighting of Interior Spaces 
3 
ARTH 178 
African-American Art I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Choose between SOCI 001 or SOCI 020 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Afro-American Cluster (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions | African-American Studies) 
3 
INTD 103 
Contemporary Interiors and Furnishings 
3 
INTD 118 
Interior Design III - Commercial 
4 
INTD 130 
Furniture Design 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
SOCI 020 
Introduction to Social Psychology 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INTD 125 
Portfolio Development & Review 
3 
INTD 169 
Interior Design Fieldwork 
4 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
INTD Selective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Art Elective - Black & White Photography 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INTD 114 
Interior Design Professional Practice 
3 
INTD 121 
Interior Design V - Thesis Project 
4 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Art Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Digital Design I 

Afro-American Cluster (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions | African-American Studies) 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

INTD Selective 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Art Elective 


Painting 
Art - Painting Concentration (B.F.A.) 
The Painting program is designed to introduce students to traditional and contemporary painting techniques with an emphasis on the control of paint and the painted form. In the intermediate and advanced level courses, students are encouraged to experiment with various media and thematic approaches. 
Type: B.F.A. 
Type: 
B.F.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 002 
Freshman Composition 
3 
ARTF 087 
Two-Dimensional Concepts I 
3 
ARTF 089 
Three Dimensional Concepts I 
3 
ARTF 001 
Drawing I 
3 
ARTH 164 
Survey of Visual Art 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 003 
Freshman Composition 
3 
ARTF 088 
Two-Dimensional Concepts II 
3 
ARTF 090 
Three-Dimensional Concepts II 
3 
ARTF 002 
Drawing II 
3 
ARTH 165 
Introduction to Art History 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTR 003 
Drawing III (Figure) 
3 
ARTA 011 
Painting I 
3 
ARTS 141 
Sculpture I: Modeling and Casting 
3 
 
Art History Elective (Options: Courses under code ARTH) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTR 004 
Drawing IV (Spatial Concepts) 
3 
 
Painting Elective 
3 
ARTD 104 
Intro to Digital Design 
3 
 
Art History Elective (Options: Courses under code ARTH) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Painting Elective 
3 
 
Painting Elective 
3 
 
Ceramics Elective 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*University Elective (Courses level 000 to 299) - Art Acceptable 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Painting Elective 
3 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Art Elective 
3 
 
MATH 005/006/010 
3 
 
University Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Painting Elective (Courses under code ARTA) 
 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Painting Elective 
3 
 
Painting Elective 
3 
 
Art Elective 
3 
 
Art Elective 
3 
ARTP 031 
Printmaking I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Painting Elective (Courses under code ARTA) 
 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Senior Thesis in Painting 
3 
 
Art Elective 
3 
 
Art Elective 
3 
 
University Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
121 
Category Descriptions 
Art History Elective (Options: Courses under code ARTH) 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Painting Elective 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Ceramics Elective 
Courses with subject code ARTC 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Philosophy (Elective) 

Art Elective 

MATH 005/006/010 
Choose between MATH 005, 006, or 010. 

University Elective 

Senior Thesis in Painting 


Photography 
Art - Photography Concentration (B.F.A.) 
The Photography program provides students with skills, techniques, and principals of conventional darkroom practices, which form the framework for digital imaging in advance courses. Color photography, taught in combination with Photoshop, adds another dimension to creative control and expression along with multimedia applications. Advance courses in Studio Lighting, Alternative Processes, and Independent Study, are designed to allow the student to produce portfolios from collective experiences and photographic knowledge. The photography program embraces modern technologies while enforcing the principles of light, color and image capture for print and the Web. We ground the student in the fundamentals of basic darkroom techniques with black and white film and chemistry in producing a finished print. Other courses challenge your approach to thematic concepts where you express ideas illustrated through the images you produce. Through digital applications you’ll learn about basic color theory, characteristics and behaviors and how color impacts the image. The program rounds out with studio lighting, alternative processes and multimedia production giving the student necessary skill sets and collaborative working environments reflecting the current trends of the global market. 
Type: B.F.A. 
*University Elective (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Studio Elective (Courses under code ARTD) 
***Art History Elective (Courses under code ARTH) 
*****Art Elective (Courses under code ARTF & ARTD) 
Type: 
B.F.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 002 
Freshman Composition 
3 
ARTF 087 
Two-Dimensional Concepts I 
3 
ARTF 089 
Three Dimensional Concepts I 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
ARTH 164 
Survey of Visual Art 
3 
ARTF 001 
Drawing I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 003 
Freshman Composition 
3 
ARTF 088 
Two-Dimensional Concepts II 
3 
ARTF 090 
Three-Dimensional Concepts II 
3 
ARTP 050 
Basic Black &White Photography 
3 
ARTH 165 
Introduction to Art History 
3 
ARTF 002 
Drawing II 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Choose HIST 009 or Div. C 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTP 051 
Intermediate Photography 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
ARTE 080 
Computers in the Arts 
3 
ARTH 170 
Modern Art History I 
3 
HHPL 175 
Controlling Stress &Tension 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTP 085 
Digital Photography 
3 
ARTP 031 
Printmaking I 
3 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MJFC 421 
Blacks in Film 
3 
ARTH 181 
Research in Art History I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language (4 credits) 
4 
ARTP 063 
Digital Darkroom 
3 
ARTH 178 
African-American Art I 
3 
 
Studio Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
ARTP 056 
Documentary Photography 
3 
ARTH 179 
African-American Art II 
3 
 
Studio Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTP 058 
Problems in Photography 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Art History Elective (Options: Courses under code ARTH) 
3 
 
Studio Elective 
3 
 
University Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTP 059 
Independent Study in Photography 
3 
ARTP 057 
Senior Photography 
3 
 
Studio Elective 
3 
 
Studio Elective 
3 
 
University Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Foreign Language (4 credits) 

Studio Elective 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Art History Elective (Options: Courses under code ARTH) 

University Elective 


Sculpture 
Art - Sculpture Concentration (B.F.A.) 
The Sculpture program provides students with a variety of sculpting experiences. The program offers courses in figure and character modeling, welded and forged steel fabrication, multi-media assemblage, wood and stone carving, woodworking, cement, and mold making and casting. B.F.A. candidates may specialize in one or a combination of areas depending on their personal direction and career path. Graduate and undergraduate students work side-by-side in a 5600 sq. ft. studio facility which houses three shop areas, graduate studios, an outside gated work area, and a 3D modeling computer lab. 
Type: B.F.A. 
Type: 
B.F.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 002 
Freshman Composition 
3 
ARTF 087 
Two-Dimensional Concepts I 
3 
ARTF 089 
Three Dimensional Concepts I 
3 
ARTF 001 
Drawing I 
3 
ARTH 164 
Survey of Visual Art 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 003 
Freshman Composition 
3 
ARTF 088 
Two-Dimensional Concepts II 
3 
ARTF 090 
Three-Dimensional Concepts II 
3 
ARTF 002 
Drawing II 
3 
ARTH 165 
Introduction to Art History 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Divisional D (MATH) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTS 141 
Sculpture I: Modeling and Casting 
3 
ARTR 003 
Drawing III (Figure) 
3 
ARTS 143 
Figure Sculpture I 
3 
ARTC 121 
Ceramics I 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Divisional D (MATH) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTS 142 
Sculpture II: Fabrication and Carving 
3 
ARTS 144 
Figure Sculpture II 
3 
ARTC 137 
Ceramic Sculpture workshop 
3 
ARTR 004 
Drawing IV (Spatial Concepts) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Sculpture Elective (Courses under ARTS) 
 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTS 149 
Metal Sculpture I: Welding and Fabrication 
3 
ARTE 080 
Computers in the Arts 
3 
 
Sculpture Elective 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
ARTH 178 
African-American Art I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Sculpture Elective (Courses under ARTS) 
 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTS 150 
Metal Sculpture II: Smithing and Forge Fabrication 
3 
 
Art Elective 
3 
 
Sculpture Elective 
3 
 
Humanities Elective (Options: See Elective Group List Divisional Studies A - Humanities) 
3 
ARTH 179 
African-American Art II 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Sculpture Elective (Courses under code ARTS) 
**University Elective (Courses level 000 to 299) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
ARTS 147 
Wood Sculpture 
3 
 
Sculpture Elective 
3 
 
Art Elective 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*University Elective (Courses level 000 to 299) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARTS 148 
Stone Sculpture 
3 
 
Sculpture Elective 
3 
 
Art Elective 
3 
 
Art History Elective (Options: Courses under code ARTH) 
3 
 
University Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
121 
Category Descriptions 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Sculpture Elective 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Art Elective 

Humanities Elective (Options: See Elective Group List Divisional Studies A - Humanities) 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Art History Elective (Options: Courses under code ARTH) 

University Elective 


Biology 
Biology (B.S.) 
The Biology Department has established a strong instructional and research unit in contemporary biological sciences and will maintain a faculty that is committed to optimizing the pursuit of new knowledge and the discovery of new information through original research and to the communication of specialized information and skills. The department offers both lecture and laboratory courses as well as research opportunities organized around three areas of concentration: Cellular and Molecular Biology, Anatomy and Physiology, and Ecology and Evolutionary Biology. 
Type: B.S. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 002 
Freshman Composition 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 005 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 003 
Freshman Composition 
3 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 
CHEM 004 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 006 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
MATH 156 
Calculus I 
4 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Choose Division A, B, or C course. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
BIOL 200 
Genetics Lec/Lab 
4 
CHEM 141 
Organic Chemistry 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
ENGL 009 
Technical Writing, Pre-Professional 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Choose Division A, B, or C course. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Biology Electives 
3 
- 
4 
CHEM 142 
Organic Chemistry 
3 
CHEM 145 
Organic Chemistry Laboratory 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Biology Electives 
3 
- 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057 and 059) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Choose Division A, B, or C course. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Biology Electives 
3 
- 
4 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Choose Division A, B, or C course. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Biology Electives 
3 
- 
4 
 
Biology Electives 
3 
- 
4 
BIOL 493 
Senior Seminar 
1 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Choose Division A, B, or C course. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Biology Electives 
3 
- 
4 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
African American Cluster (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies C: Social Sciences (Open to Sophomores) 
AFRO 131 
Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
3 
AFRO 133 
Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
3 
AFRO 191 
Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
ANTH 120 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
3 
CLAS 110 
Blacks in Antiquity 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 199 
Introduction to Urban Economics 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
HIST 030 
Introduction to African History I 
3 
HIST 031 
Introduction to African History II 
3 
HIST 040 
Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
3 
HIST 041 
Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
3 
HIST 150 
Europe to 1815 
3 
HIST 051 
Introduction to European History II 
3 
POLS 003 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
3 
POLS 005 
Introduction to African Politics 
3 
POLS 011 
State and Local Government 
3 
POLS 143 
Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
3 

Biology Electives 
Note – all core courses (BIOL101, BIOL 102, and BIOL 200) must be completed before taking most Biology electives. 
BIOL 220 
General Microbiology 
4 
BIOL 310 
Cell Biology 
4 
BIOL 320 
Molecular Biology 
4 
BIOL 413 
Developmental Biology 
4 
BIOL 416 
Advanced Cytology 
4 
BIOL 420 
Cancer Biology 
3 
BIOL 421 
Virology 
3 
BIOL 422 
Immunology 
4 
BIOL 425 
Pathogenic Bacteriology 
4 
BIOL 441 
Endocrinology 
4 
BIOL 450 
Molecular Genetics 
4 
BIOL 462 
Biotechnology 
4 
BIOL 500 
Topics in Molecular and Cellular Biology 
1 
BIOL 219 
Topics in Aspects of Aging 
1 
BIOL 251 
Comparative Anatomy 
4 
BIOL 319 
Aging Physiology 
1 
BIOL 340 
Bacterial Physiology 
3 
BIOL 341 
Animal Physiology 
4 
BIOL 344 
Plant Physiology 
4 
BIOL 406 
Experimental Parasitology 
4 
BIOL 444 
Neurophysiology 
4 
BIOL 460 
Molecular Plant Physiology 
4 
BIOL 502 
Topics in Anatomy & Physiology 
1 
BIOL 202 
Plant Diversity Lec/Lab 
1 
BIOL 205 
Invertebrate Biology 
4 
BIOL 230 
Ecology 
4 
BIOL 240 
Evolution 
3 
BIOL 328 
Global Climate Change 
4 
BIOL 402 
Insect Biology 
3 
BIOL 404 
Parasitology 
4 
BIOL 407 
Ichthyology, 
4 
BIOL 409 
Animal Behavior 
4 
BIOL 410 
Plant Systematics 
4 
BIOL 412 
Biological Anthropology 
4 
BIOL 424 
Environmental Microbiology 
4 
BIOL 426 
Food Microbiology 
4 
BIOL 432 
Plant Populations and Communities 
4 
BIOL 449 
Population Genetics 
4 
BIOL 475 
Human Evolutionary Biology 
4 
BIOL 204 
Science and Public Policy 
3 
BIOL 390 
Independent Investigations 
3 
BIOL 430 
Biostatistics 
4 
PSYC 023 
Neuropsychology 
3 
CHEM 151 
Biochemistry I 
3 
CHEM 152 
Biochemistry II 
3 
BIOL 217 
Honors Orientation 
1 
BIOL 218 
Directed Readings 
1 
BIOL 419 
Bioinformatics 
4 
BIOL 491/492 
Honors Research 
2 
BIOL 498/499 
Honors Seminar 
0 
BIOL 801 
Environmental Studies I 
3 
BIOL 501 
Topics in Ecology & Evolution 
1 
BIOL 317 
Directed Readings for Juniors 
1 
BIOL 318 
Proposal Development 
1 
BIOL 417 
Evolutionary Medicine 
4 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 

Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057 and 059) 
PHIL 051 
Principles of Reasoning 
3 
PHIL 053 
Introduction to Philosophy of Science 
3 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 
PHIL 057 
Introduction to Ethics 
3 
PHIL 059 
Knowledge and Value 
3 

African American Cluster (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 


Criminology 
Criminology (B.A.) 
The Criminology program provides students with the basic tools for analysis and insight, including research methods (both quantitative and qualitative) and theory. Furthermore, our curriculum equips students to more effectively negotiate the diverse society in which we live by addressing social inequalities such as race/ethnicity, gender and social class. Above all, the Criminology program with its emphasis on writing, critical thinking, group dialogue, and one-on-one faculty mentorship, gives graduates the strong writing, research, and analytic skills that are increasingly attractive to employers in the information age. 
Type: B.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
ENGL 002 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Edu Health Science 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 003 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
HHPL 002 
Beginning Swimming 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*MATH 006 or MATH 001 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Writing Course 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
African American Cluster (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*MATH 007 or MATH 002 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
 
Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 052, 055, 057) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Minor Course (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject Minor) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
SOCI 074 
Corrections 
3 
SOCI 110 
Elementary Statistics 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Minor Elective (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SOCI 070 
Introduction to Criminology 
3 
SOCI 111 
Sociological Methods 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
SOCI 170 
Principles of Criminal Justice 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Minor Course (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SOCI 079 
Internship 
3 
 
CRIM Elective 
3 
 
CRIM Elective 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
CRIM Elective 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
121 
Category Descriptions 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Physical Edu Health Science 
HHPL 159, 160, or 175. 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Writing Course 

African American Cluster (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 

Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 052, 055, 057) 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

CRIM Elective 


Chemistry 
Chemistry (B.S.) - Calculus Sequence 
The chemistry undergraduate major gives a solid preparation for further study in medicine and dentistry. It is also a desirable major for students who later choose to pursue law or business administration. The broad requirements in physics and mathematics provide a strong background for a career in the teaching of science. In general, chemists are employed in chemical manufacturing, pharmaceutical manufacturing, the petrochemical industries, teaching, environmental and waste management, and in government. 
Type: B.S. 
i. Students must take courses from the African-American Cluster such as: Divisional A: ENGL 054/055 African-American Literature; Divisional B: AFRO 005/006 Afro-American Studies; Divisional C: AFST 101 African World: Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
ii. General and Chemistry Electives should be chosen with the assistance of an advisor 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 005 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
MATH 156 
Calculus I 
4 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
ENGL 002 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 004 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 006 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
MATH 157 
Calculus II 
4 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
ENGL 003 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Choose between PHYS 001 or PHYS 013. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 141 
Organic Chemistry 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
MATH 158 
Calculus III 
4 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Choose between PHYS 002 or PHYS 013 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 142 
Organic Chemistry 
3 
CHEM 145 
Organic Chemistry Laboratory 
3 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 171 
Physical Chemistry Lecture 
3 
CHEM 173 
Physical Chemistry Laboratory 
2 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 172 
Physical Chemistry Lecture 
3 
CHEM 174 
Physical Chemistry Laboratory 
2 
CHEM 101 
Inorganic Chemistry 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General/Chemistry Elective 
1 
- 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 122 
Analytical Chemistry Lectures 
3 
CHEM 123 
Analytical Chemistry Laboratory 
2 
CHEM 151 
Biochemistry I 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
HHPL 002 
Beginning Swimming 
1 
 
General/Chemistry Elective 
1 
- 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 127 
Instrumental Methods of Analysis—Laboratory 
2 
CHEM 126 
Instrumental Methods of Analysis—Lecture 
3 
CHEM 152 
Biochemistry II 
3 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 
 
General/Chemistry Elective 
1 
- 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
 
Total credits: 
121 
Category Descriptions 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

General/Chemistry Elective 

Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies C: Social Sciences (Open to Sophomores) 
AFRO 131 
Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
3 
AFRO 133 
Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
3 
AFRO 191 
Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
ANTH 120 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
3 
CLAS 110 
Blacks in Antiquity 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 199 
Introduction to Urban Economics 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
HIST 030 
Introduction to African History I 
3 
HIST 031 
Introduction to African History II 
3 
HIST 040 
Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
3 
HIST 041 
Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
3 
HIST 150 
Europe to 1815 
3 
HIST 051 
Introduction to European History II 
3 
POLS 003 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
3 
POLS 005 
Introduction to African Politics 
3 
POLS 011 
State and Local Government 
3 
POLS 143 
Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
3 


Chemistry (B.S.) - Pre-Calculus Sequence 
The chemistry undergraduate major gives a solid preparation for further study in medicine and dentistry. It is also a desirable major for students who later choose to pursue law or business administration. The broad requirements in physics and mathematics provide a strong background for a career in the teaching of science. In general, chemists are employed in chemical manufacturing, pharmaceutical manufacturing, the petrochemical industries, teaching, environmental and waste management, and in government. 
Type: B.S. 
i. Students must take courses from the African-American Cluster such as: Divisional A: ENGL 054/055 African-American Literature; Divisional B: AFRO 005/006 Afro-American Studies; Divisional C: AFST 101 African World: Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
ii. General and Chemistry Electives should be chosen with the assistance of an advisor 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 005 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
ENGL 002 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 004 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 006 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
MATH 156 
Calculus I 
4 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
ENGL 003 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Choose between PHYS 001 or PHYS 013. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 141 
Organic Chemistry 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
MATH 157 
Calculus II 
4 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Choose between PHYS 002 or PHYS 013 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 142 
Organic Chemistry 
3 
CHEM 145 
Organic Chemistry Laboratory 
3 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
MATH 158 
Calculus III 
4 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 171 
Physical Chemistry Lecture 
3 
CHEM 173 
Physical Chemistry Laboratory 
2 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 172 
Physical Chemistry Lecture 
3 
CHEM 174 
Physical Chemistry Laboratory 
2 
CHEM 101 
Inorganic Chemistry 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 122 
Analytical Chemistry Lectures 
3 
CHEM 123 
Analytical Chemistry Laboratory 
2 
CHEM 151 
Biochemistry I 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
HHPL 002 
Beginning Swimming 
1 
 
General/Chemistry Elective 
1 
- 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 127 
Instrumental Methods of Analysis—Laboratory 
2 
CHEM 126 
Instrumental Methods of Analysis—Lecture 
3 
CHEM 152 
Biochemistry II 
3 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 
 
General/Chemistry Elective 
1 
- 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
 
Total credits: 
121 
Category Descriptions 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies C: Social Sciences (Open to Sophomores) 
AFRO 131 
Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
3 
AFRO 133 
Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
3 
AFRO 191 
Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
ANTH 120 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
3 
CLAS 110 
Blacks in Antiquity 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 199 
Introduction to Urban Economics 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
HIST 030 
Introduction to African History I 
3 
HIST 031 
Introduction to African History II 
3 
HIST 040 
Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
3 
HIST 041 
Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
3 
HIST 150 
Europe to 1815 
3 
HIST 051 
Introduction to European History II 
3 
POLS 003 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
3 
POLS 005 
Introduction to African Politics 
3 
POLS 011 
State and Local Government 
3 
POLS 143 
Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
3 

General/Chemistry Elective 


Economics 
Economics (B.A.) 
The undergraduate program in economics at Howard University is structured to provide students with a thorough foundation in economic theory and the use of mathematics, statistics, and computer technology to analyze contemporary policy issues. 
Type: B.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
***Econ Major Elective (Courses under ECON) 
****Minor Courses (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Choose between MATH 010 or MATH 007 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Foreign Language (Level 2+) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
African American Cluster (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
English Writing Course 
3 
ECON 180 
Statistics for Business and Economics 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Foreign Language (Level 3+) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
 
Foreign Language (Level 4+) 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 170 
Intermediate Microeconomic Theory 
3 
ECON 184 
Introduction to Econometrics 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 171 
Intermediate Macroeconomic Theory 
3 
 
Econ Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Econ Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Econ Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Econ Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Econ Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Foreign Language (Level 2+) 

African American Cluster (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 

English Writing Course 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW. 

Foreign Language (Level 3+) 

Foreign Language (Level 4+) 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Econ Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 


English 
English (B.A.) 
English majors gain strong critical reading, analytical thinking, focused research, and precise writing skills. The required core courses will enable students to fulfill requirements for state teaching accreditation, graduate work in the humanities, and admission to a wide variety of professional schools 
Type: B.A. 
*PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057, 082, and 159 only fulfill the University philosophy requirement. 
**Based on Mathematics Placement Exam (Algebra II competency) [010(4)] 158 Calculus III 
***HHPLS: 159, 160, 161, 162, 164, 175 
****To satisfy an Afro-American cluster course requirement students should take Division A, B, or C courses that satisfy this requirement. 
*****Some students may enroll in level 2 or 3 of a World Language course immediately. 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Mathematics (Division D) - Based on Mathematics Placement Exam (Algebra II competency) [010(4)] 158 Calculus III. In the first or second semester of Freshman year, 4 hours of Division D are expected. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW - FYW for Majors 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057, 082, and 159 only fulfill the University philosophy requirement. 
**Mathematics (Division D) - *Based on Mathematics Placement Exam (Algebra II competency) [010(4)] 158 Calculus III. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW - FYW for Majors 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 104 
Sophomore Seminar I: Introduction to English Studies 
3 
HHPL 002 
Beginning Swimming 
1 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
ENGL 113 
British Literary Foundations 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
**Physical Education Elective (Options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 105 
Sophomore Seminar II: Theories of Interpretation. 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
ENGL 112 
American Literary Foundations 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
ENGL 110 
Linguistic (and/or Language) Foundations 
3 
ENGL 111 
African American Literary Foundations 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Genre or Period Course (Courses under ENGL) 
**Major Elective (Courses under ENGL) 
***Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
****General Elective (Courses level 000 to 299) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Genre or Period Course 
3 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Major Author (Courses under ENGL) 
**Major Elective (Courses under ENGL) 
***Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Major Author 
3 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Major Elective (Courses under ENGL) 
**Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
***General Elective (Courses level 000 to 299) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW - FYW for Majors 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Philosophy (Elective) 

Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies C: Social Sciences (Open to Sophomores) 
AFRO 131 
Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
3 
AFRO 133 
Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
3 
AFRO 191 
Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
ANTH 120 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
3 
CLAS 110 
Blacks in Antiquity 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 199 
Introduction to Urban Economics 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
HIST 030 
Introduction to African History I 
3 
HIST 031 
Introduction to African History II 
3 
HIST 040 
Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
3 
HIST 041 
Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
3 
HIST 150 
Europe to 1815 
3 
HIST 051 
Introduction to European History II 
3 
POLS 003 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
3 
POLS 005 
Introduction to African Politics 
3 
POLS 011 
State and Local Government 
3 
POLS 143 
Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
3 

Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

Genre or Period Course 

Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Major Author 


English (B.A.) - Creative Writing Concentration 
English majors gain strong critical reading, analytical thinking, focused research, and precise writing skills. The required core courses will enable students to fulfill requirements for state teaching accreditation, graduate work in the humanities, and admission to a wide variety of professional schools 
Type: B.A. 
*PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057, 082, and 159 only fulfill the University philosophy requirement. 
**Based on Mathematics Placement Exam (Algebra II competency) [010(4)] 158 Calculus III 
***HHPLS: 159, 160, 161, 162, 164, 175 
****To satisfy an Afro-American cluster course requirement students should take Division A, B, or C courses that satisfy this requirement. 
*****Some students may enroll in level 2 or 3 of a World Language course immediately. 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Mathematics (Division D) - Based on Mathematics Placement Exam (Algebra II competency) [010(4)] 158 Calculus III. In the first or second semester of Freshman year, 4 hours of Division D are expected. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW - FYW for Majors 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057, 082, and 159 only fulfill the University philosophy requirement. Counts as Division A. 
**Mathematics (Division D) - *Based on Mathematics Placement Exam (Algebra II competency) [010(4)] 158 Calculus III. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW - FYW for Majors 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 104 
Sophomore Seminar I: Introduction to English Studies 
3 
HHPL 002 
Beginning Swimming 
1 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
ENGL 113 
British Literary Foundations 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
**Physical Education Elective (Options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 105 
Sophomore Seminar II: Theories of Interpretation. 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
ENGL 112 
American Literary Foundations 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
ENGL - Intro to Creative Writing 
3 
ENGL 111 
African American Literary Foundations 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Genre or Period Course (Courses under ENGL) 
**Major Elective (Courses under ENGL) 
***Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
****General Elective (Courses level 000 to 299) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Genre or Period Course 
3 
 
ENGL - Creative Writing 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Major Author (Courses under ENGL) 
**Major Elective (Courses under ENGL) 
***Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Major Author 
3 
 
ENGL - Creative Writing Workshop 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Major Elective (Courses under ENGL) 
**Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
***General Elective (Courses level 000 to 299) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
ENGL - Creative Writing Thesis 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW - FYW for Majors 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Philosophy (Elective) 

Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies C: Social Sciences (Open to Sophomores) 
AFRO 131 
Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
3 
AFRO 133 
Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
3 
AFRO 191 
Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
ANTH 120 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
3 
CLAS 110 
Blacks in Antiquity 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 199 
Introduction to Urban Economics 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
HIST 030 
Introduction to African History I 
3 
HIST 031 
Introduction to African History II 
3 
HIST 040 
Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
3 
HIST 041 
Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
3 
HIST 150 
Europe to 1815 
3 
HIST 051 
Introduction to European History II 
3 
POLS 003 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
3 
POLS 005 
Introduction to African Politics 
3 
POLS 011 
State and Local Government 
3 
POLS 143 
Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
3 

Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

ENGL - Intro to Creative Writing 

Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

Genre or Period Course 

ENGL - Creative Writing 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Major Author 

ENGL - Creative Writing Workshop 

Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

ENGL - Creative Writing Thesis 


History 
History (B.A.) 
The undergraduate program in history is designed to provide the student with an understanding of the processes of historical research and reconstruction, an appreciation of the discipline of history as a way of thinking and learning, and substantive knowledge in those areas of history in which the student may concentrate. 
Type: B.A. 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Freshman English (Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW) 
**Lect. In Concentration (Courses under subject code HIST) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Freshman English 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Lect. In Concentration 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Freshman English (Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW) 
**Lect. In Concentration (Courses under subject code HIST) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Freshman English 
3 
 
Lect. In Concentration 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Major Elective (Courses under subject code HIST) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*HIST 005/006 - Black Diaspora I (3crs) or Black Diaspora II (3crs) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
HIST 005/006 
3 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Major Elective (Courses under subject code HIST) 
**Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
HIST 700 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II, Writing 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*History Seminar (Options: HIST 152 - 161 & 180) 
**Major Elective (Courses under subject code HIST) 
***Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
History Seminar 
3 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Major Elective (Courses under subject code HIST) 
**Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
***General Education Elective (Courses under subject code HIST) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Education Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
General Education Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Major Elective (Courses under subject code HIST) 
**Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
***General Education Elective (Courses under subject code HIST) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Education Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor or Gen. Ed Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
 
Total credits: 
122 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman English 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Lect. In Concentration 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

HIST 005/006 

Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

History Seminar 

Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies C: Social Sciences (Open to Sophomores) 
AFRO 131 
Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
3 
AFRO 133 
Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
3 
AFRO 191 
Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
ANTH 120 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
3 
CLAS 110 
Blacks in Antiquity 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 199 
Introduction to Urban Economics 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
HIST 030 
Introduction to African History I 
3 
HIST 031 
Introduction to African History II 
3 
HIST 040 
Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
3 
HIST 041 
Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
3 
HIST 150 
Europe to 1815 
3 
HIST 051 
Introduction to European History II 
3 
POLS 003 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
3 
POLS 005 
Introduction to African Politics 
3 
POLS 011 
State and Local Government 
3 
POLS 143 
Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
3 

General Education Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

Minor or Gen. Ed Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 


Allied Health Education 
Health Education - Community Health Concentration (B.S.) 
The Health Education degree prepares students who wish to find employment in community based agencies, public health departments, non-profit organizations or hospitals. 
Type: B.S. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition, English, or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
***Minor Elective (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor)  
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
NUTR 161 
Nutrition for Health Majors 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
HHPL 140 
Human Growth and Development 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 157 
Health Problems of Children and Youth 
3 
HHPL 163 
Foundation of Health Promotion 
3 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 153 
Human Sexuality 
3 
HHPL 165 
Health of Women, Children and Families 
3 
HHPL 723 
Introduction to Research and Statistics 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 185 
Field Work A – Health Education Majors 
1 
HHPL 152 
Methods and Materials of Health Education 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 167 
MCH-Institute 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
HHPL 186 
Field Work B – Health Education Majors 
1 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
HHPL 159/160/175 
1 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HLMN 201 
Community Health Organizations 
3 
HHPL 187 
Field Work C – Health Education Majors 
1 
HHPL 755 
Addictive Behavior 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 179 
Community Health Internship – Majors Only 
9 
 
Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057 and 059) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
122 
Category Descriptions 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

ENGW 103/105 

Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies C: Social Sciences (Open to Sophomores) 
AFRO 131 
Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
3 
AFRO 133 
Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
3 
AFRO 191 
Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
ANTH 120 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
3 
CLAS 110 
Blacks in Antiquity 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 199 
Introduction to Urban Economics 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
HIST 030 
Introduction to African History I 
3 
HIST 031 
Introduction to African History II 
3 
HIST 040 
Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
3 
HIST 041 
Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
3 
HIST 150 
Europe to 1815 
3 
HIST 051 
Introduction to European History II 
3 
POLS 003 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
3 
POLS 005 
Introduction to African Politics 
3 
POLS 011 
State and Local Government 
3 
POLS 143 
Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
3 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

HHPL 159/160/175 
Choose from HHPL 159, 160, 175 

Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057 and 059) 
PHIL 051 
Principles of Reasoning 
3 
PHIL 053 
Introduction to Philosophy of Science 
3 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 
PHIL 057 
Introduction to Ethics 
3 
PHIL 059 
Knowledge and Value 
3 


Health Education - Maternal & Child Health Concentration (B.S.) 
The Health Education degree prepares students who wish to find employment in community based agencies, public health departments, non-profit organizations or hospitals. 
NOTES: Students majoring in health education studies are required to complete a minimum of 15 credits in a minor of their choice. 
Type: B.S. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition, English, or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
***Minor Elective (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor)  
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
NUTR 161 
Nutrition for Health Majors 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
HHPL 140 
Human Growth and Development 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 157 
Health Problems of Children and Youth 
3 
HHPL 163 
Foundation of Health Promotion 
3 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 102 
Human Anatomy (Majors only) 
3 
HHPL 108 
Human Anatomy Laboratory 
1 
HHPL 165 
Health of Women, Children and Families 
3 
HHPL 723 
Introduction to Research and Statistics 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 152 
Methods and Materials of Health Education 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
HUDV 143 
Parentology: Theory, Research, and Support Systems 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 167 
MCH-Institute 
3 
HUDV 119 
Diverse Youth of Color 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
HHPL 159/160/175 
1 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HLMN 201 
Community Health Organizations 
3 
HHPL 755 
Addictive Behavior 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 160 
Women’s Health 
1 
HHPL 175 
Controlling Stress &Tension 
1 
HUDV 113 
Prenatal, Infancy and Early Childhood Development 
3 
 
Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057 and 059) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
11 
 
Total credits: 
122 
Category Descriptions 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

ENGW 103/105 

Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies C: Social Sciences (Open to Sophomores) 
AFRO 131 
Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
3 
AFRO 133 
Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
3 
AFRO 191 
Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
ANTH 120 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
3 
CLAS 110 
Blacks in Antiquity 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 199 
Introduction to Urban Economics 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
HIST 030 
Introduction to African History I 
3 
HIST 031 
Introduction to African History II 
3 
HIST 040 
Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
3 
HIST 041 
Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
3 
HIST 150 
Europe to 1815 
3 
HIST 051 
Introduction to European History II 
3 
POLS 003 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
3 
POLS 005 
Introduction to African Politics 
3 
POLS 011 
State and Local Government 
3 
POLS 143 
Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
3 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

HHPL 159/160/175 
Choose from HHPL 159, 160, 175 

Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057 and 059) 
PHIL 051 
Principles of Reasoning 
3 
PHIL 053 
Introduction to Philosophy of Science 
3 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 
PHIL 057 
Introduction to Ethics 
3 
PHIL 059 
Knowledge and Value 
3 


Interdisciplinary Studies 
Interdisciplinary Studies - Bioethics Concentration (B.A.) 
Our degree program is proposed as a field of study within the College of Arts and Sciences and as such would embrace several disciplines in the college and adhere to the college general education curriculum. Our Interdisciplinary Studies program is comprised by a set of courses that ground theory in practice, emphasize teamwork, utilize the scholar-practitioner model, and forges partnerships with government, industry, corporations, non-profit organizations and community organizations to provide students with hands on experience. 
Type: B.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
***Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
PHIL 164 
Current Topics 
3 
 
HHPL 159/160/175 
1 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
HHPL 002 
Beginning Swimming 
1 
 
Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057 and 059) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
MATH 006/009 
3 
 
Philosophy or English Writing Course 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Course (Options: Courses AFST-1 or higher) 
3 
PHIL 173 
The Ethics of Medical Care 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
MATH 007/010 (3) 
3 
PHIL 110 
Classical Ethics 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
ANTH 215 
Medical Anthropology 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year, First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SOCI 183 
Introduction to Medical Sociology 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year, Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
BIOL 204 
Science and Public Policy 
3 
 
PHIL 140/339 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Research Methods 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year, First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
ISB Elective SOCI 079 or other 
3 
PHIL 200 
Senior Seminar 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year, Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ISB Elective SOCI 079 or other 
3 
 
Political Economy and Society: POLS, ECON or SOCI 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

HHPL 159/160/175 
Choose from HHPL 159, 160, 175 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

ENGW 103/105 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057 and 059) 
PHIL 051 
Principles of Reasoning 
3 
PHIL 053 
Introduction to Philosophy of Science 
3 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 
PHIL 057 
Introduction to Ethics 
3 
PHIL 059 
Knowledge and Value 
3 

MATH 006/009 
Choose between MATH 006 or 009. 

Philosophy or English Writing Course 
Choose between a Philosophy Writing Course (WRTG) or an English Writing Course. 

Afro-American Studies Course (Options: Courses AFST-1 or higher) 
Options: Courses AFST-1 or higher. 

MATH 007/010 (3) 
Choose between MATH 007 and 010 

Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies C: Social Sciences (Open to Sophomores) 
AFRO 131 
Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
3 
AFRO 133 
Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
3 
AFRO 191 
Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
ANTH 120 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
3 
CLAS 110 
Blacks in Antiquity 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 199 
Introduction to Urban Economics 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
HIST 030 
Introduction to African History I 
3 
HIST 031 
Introduction to African History II 
3 
HIST 040 
Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
3 
HIST 041 
Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
3 
HIST 150 
Europe to 1815 
3 
HIST 051 
Introduction to European History II 
3 
POLS 003 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
3 
POLS 005 
Introduction to African Politics 
3 
POLS 011 
State and Local Government 
3 
POLS 143 
Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
3 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

PHIL 140/339 
Choose between PHIL 140 or 339. 

Research Methods 
• 
SOCI 111 Social Methods and Techniques, or   

• 
POLS 002. Introduction to Research in Political Science, or  

• 
POLS 199. Behavioral Research Methods.  



ISB Elective SOCI 079 or other 

Political Economy and Society: POLS, ECON or SOCI 


Interdisciplinary Studies - Community Development Concentration (B.A.) 
Our degree program is proposed as a field of study within the College of Arts and Sciences and as such would embrace several disciplines in the college and adhere to the college general education curriculum. Our Interdisciplinary Studies program is comprised by a set of courses that ground theory in practice, emphasize teamwork, utilize the scholar-practitioner model, and forges partnerships with government, industry, corporations, non-profit organizations and community organizations to provide students with hands on experience. 
Type: B.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
***Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Foreign Language (4 credits) 
4 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Foreign Language (4 credits) 
4 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Mathematics Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
English Writing Course 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 138 
Seminar in Community Development 
3 
 
Mathematics Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 188 
The Economics of Black Community Development 
3 
SOCI 111 
Sociological Methods 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year, First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HUCO 101 
Principles of Speech 
3 
POLS 165 
Urban Political Economy 
3 
ECON 180 
Statistics for Business and Economics 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
SOCI 140 
Urban Sociology 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year, Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year, First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Internship 
6 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year, Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

Foreign Language (4 credits) 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Mathematics Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
 
MATH 006/007 
3 
- 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 020 
Fundamental Concepts of Mathematics for Education I 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
MATH 084-085 
Directed Readings in Honors for Sophomores 
1 
MATH 160 
Advanced Calculus for Science and Engineering 
3 
MATH 161, 162 
Seminar 
1 
- 
3 
MATH 164 
Introduction to Numerical Analysis 
3 
MATH 165, 166 
Directed Readings. 
1 
- 
3 
MATH 168 
Actuarial Science Laboratory I 
1 
MATH 169 
Actuarial Science Laboratory II 
1 
MATH 190 
Probability and Statistics II 
3 
MATH 191 
Foundations of Applied Mathematics 
3 
MATH 192 
Topics in Applied Mathematics 
3 
MATH 193 
Actuarial Science Seminar 
3 
MATH 196 
Introduction to Analysis II 
3 
MATH 197 
Introduction to Modern Algebra I 
3 
MATH 198 
Introduction to Modern Algebra II 
3 

English Writing Course 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW. 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Internship 


Interdisciplinary Studies - Environmental Studies Concentration (B.A.) 
Our degree program is proposed as a field of study within the College of Arts and Sciences and as such would embrace several disciplines in the college and adhere to the college general education curriculum. Our Interdisciplinary Studies program is comprised by a set of courses that ground theory in practice, emphasize teamwork, utilize the scholar-practitioner model, and forges partnerships with government, industry, corporations, non-profit organizations and community organizations to provide students with hands on experience. 
Type: B.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
***Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
ENGW 102 
Expository Writing & Literacy Studies 
3 
BIOL 801 
Environmental Studies I 
3 
 
BIOL 101/CHEM 003 
4 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGW 103 
Persuasive Writing & Research 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
SOCI 199 
Environmental Inequality 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 009 
Technical Writing, Pre-Professional 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
MATH 007/156/009 
4 
 
Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 052, 055, 057) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Environmental Studies Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year, First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Environmental Studies Elective 
3 
 
SOCI 110/111 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year, Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Environmental Studies Elective 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
BIOL 204 
Science and Public Policy 
3 
AFST 121 
Environment and Society in Africa 
4 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year, First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
African American Cluster/ Division B 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Environmental Studies Elective 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Health Course 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Senior Year, Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Environmental Studies Elective 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Activity Course 
1 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
BIOL 101/CHEM 003 
Choose between BIOL 101 or CHEM 003. 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

MATH 007/156/009 
Choose between MATH 007, 156, or 009. 

Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 052, 055, 057) 

Environmental Studies Elective 

SOCI 110/111 
Choose between SOCI 110 or 111. 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

African American Cluster/ Division B 
Choose between a course from the African American Cluster or Division B. 

Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies C: Social Sciences (Open to Sophomores) 
AFRO 131 
Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
3 
AFRO 133 
Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
3 
AFRO 191 
Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
ANTH 120 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
3 
CLAS 110 
Blacks in Antiquity 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 199 
Introduction to Urban Economics 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
HIST 030 
Introduction to African History I 
3 
HIST 031 
Introduction to African History II 
3 
HIST 040 
Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
3 
HIST 041 
Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
3 
HIST 150 
Europe to 1815 
3 
HIST 051 
Introduction to European History II 
3 
POLS 003 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
3 
POLS 005 
Introduction to African Politics 
3 
POLS 011 
State and Local Government 
3 
POLS 143 
Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
3 

Health Course 
Choose between HHPL 159, 160, 162, or 174. 

Activity Course 
HHPL 002 and others. 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 


Interdisciplinary Studies - Humanities, Ancient & Modern Concentration (B.A.) 
Interdisciplinary Humanities: Ancient and Modern provides a cross-cultural, cross-historical exposure to the Humanities for students interested in obtaining a globally themed liberal arts education. With geographical, thematic, and chronological breadth in the history of ideas, literature, language, art, religion, and archaeology, Interdisciplinary Humanities gives special attention to the intersections between ancient and modern modes of thought in each of these topic areas.  This concentration also provides an opportunity for intensive training in critical skills (reading, writing, logic, rhetoric, literary, artistic, and historical analysis), and so offers excellent preparation for all of the liberal professions (journalism, law, teaching, diplomacy, etc.). It also offers an attractive minor for STEM majors wishing to complement technical training with a humanistic education. 
Type: B.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
***Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Division D: Mathematics 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
ENGL 002 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education (Swimming) - 1 cr 
1 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Division D: Mathematics 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 003 
Freshman Composition 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language I (Ancient) 
3 
CLAS 050 
Ancient Egypt & the Near East 
3 
 
INHU Area of Focus (Ancient) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language II (Ancient) 
3 
CLAS 051 
Greece/Rome 
3 
 
Afro-American Cluster (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions | African-American Studies) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year, First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language III (Ancient) 
3 
 
INHU Area of Focus (Modern) 
3 
 
INHU Elective 
3 
 
INHU Elective 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year, Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
INHU Area of Focus (Modern) 
3 
 
INHU Elective 
3 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Foreign Language IV (Ancient) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year, First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Capstone Project (INHU) 
3 
 
Foreign Language (Ancient or Modern) 
3 
 
Writing Course 
3 
 
General Elective (CLAS or ENG) 
3 
 
General Elective (AFRO or Art History) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year, Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Capstone Project (INHU) 
3 
 
Foreign Language (Ancient or Modern) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
General Elective (PHIL or WLC) 
3 
 
General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (2) 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Physical Education (Swimming) - 1 cr 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Foreign Language I (Ancient) 

INHU Area of Focus (Ancient) 

Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

Foreign Language II (Ancient) 

Afro-American Cluster (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions | African-American Studies) 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 

Foreign Language III (Ancient) 

INHU Area of Focus (Modern) 

INHU Elective 

Philosophy (Elective) 

Foreign Language IV (Ancient) 

Capstone Project (INHU) 

Foreign Language (Ancient or Modern) 

Writing Course 

General Elective (CLAS or ENG) 

General Elective (AFRO or Art History) 

General Elective (PHIL or WLC) 

General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (2) 


Interdisciplinary Studies - International Affairs Concentration (B.A.) 
The International Affairs Concentration within the Interdisciplinary Studies Major allows students to explore, interpret, and understand significant global events via an interdisciplinary lens designed to promote critical thinking and innovative solutions to contemporary global and domestic human problems. The challenges confronting our increasingly interconnected world defy simple solutions.  By merging the perspectives of different disciplines in innovative paradigms, students comprehend and creatively analyze issues that affect human rights, well–being, peace, and stability.  This program generates productive members of society and future leaders passionate about learning, committed to global justice and equity, and inspired by an ethic of service to humanity as a whole. 
Type: B.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
***Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Freshman English 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Activity 1 
1 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Freshman English 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
POLS 008 
Introduction to Political Economy 
3 
POLS 128 
International Relations 
3 
 
Physical Education (Swimming) - 1 cr 
1 
 
Activity 2 
1 
 
Health 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Mathematics Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
3 
 
English Writing Course 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
POLS 002 
Introduction to Research in Political Science 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
POLS 004 
Introduction to Political Theory 
3 
 
Mathematics Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year, First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
IA Course 
3 
 
IA Course 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year, Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
IA Course 
3 
 
IA Course 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
IA Course 
3 
 
African American Cluster/ Division B 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year, First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
IA Course 
3 
 
Internship 1 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year, Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
IA Course 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Internship 2 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Freshman English 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Activity 1 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Physical Education (Swimming) - 1 cr 

Activity 2 

Health 

Mathematics Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
 
MATH 006/007 
3 
- 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 020 
Fundamental Concepts of Mathematics for Education I 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
MATH 084-085 
Directed Readings in Honors for Sophomores 
1 
MATH 160 
Advanced Calculus for Science and Engineering 
3 
MATH 161, 162 
Seminar 
1 
- 
3 
MATH 164 
Introduction to Numerical Analysis 
3 
MATH 165, 166 
Directed Readings. 
1 
- 
3 
MATH 168 
Actuarial Science Laboratory I 
1 
MATH 169 
Actuarial Science Laboratory II 
1 
MATH 190 
Probability and Statistics II 
3 
MATH 191 
Foundations of Applied Mathematics 
3 
MATH 192 
Topics in Applied Mathematics 
3 
MATH 193 
Actuarial Science Seminar 
3 
MATH 196 
Introduction to Analysis II 
3 
MATH 197 
Introduction to Modern Algebra I 
3 
MATH 198 
Introduction to Modern Algebra II 
3 

English Writing Course 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW. 

Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

IA Course 
POLS 001 
 Introduction to Political Science* 
 
POLS 008 
 Introduction to Political Economy 
 
POLS 128 
 International Relations* 
 
POLS 002 
 Introduction to Research in Political Science 
 
POLS 006 
 Pan Africanism* 
 
POLS 004 
 Intro Political Theory 
 
POLS l50 
  International Affairs Internship 1 
 
POLS 151  
  International Affairs Internship 2 
 


Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

African American Cluster/ Division B 
Choose between a course from the African American Cluster or Division B. 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Philosophy (Elective) 

Internship 1 

Internship 2 


Interdisciplinary Studies - Social Justice Certificate 
The Social Justice certificate (6 credit hours) is housed in COAS in the Department of Interdisciplinary Studies. The certificate is focused on Social Justice knowledge through the Humanities and Humanistic Social Sciences courses. The courses in this certificate program will educate students about the roots of social problems, raise the critical consciousness they need to analyze and address them, and encourage them to develop innovative and collaborative action-oriented-remedies. The certificate courses will not only deepen community social justice knowledge, but positions Humanities and Humanistic Social Sciences as the means to solve social problems. 
Social Justice Studies Certificate: 
The pernicious issues facing our society such as systemic racism, white supremacy, gender inequality, injustice (broadly defined), poverty, and discrimination along gender-identity and sexuality lines to name a few, demand a specific type of consciousness-raising, action-oriented education. The courses in this certificate program educate students about the roots of social problems, raise the critical consciousness they need to analyze and address them, and encourage them to develop innovative and collaborative action-oriented-remedies. The certificate courses not only deepen community social justice knowledge, but position Humanities and Humanistic Social Sciences as the means to solve social problems. Education, empowerment, and strategy across different sectors and demographics increase the critical consciousness, participation in, and efficacy of social justice activism. Broadening access to Humanities knowledge will increase community engagement and the quality of the solutions people develop to combat these ills in their own communities. 
Courses 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
IDSD 140 
Introduction to Social Justice Studies 
1 
IDSD 141 
What Does Justice Look Like for Black Americans? 
1 
IDSD 154 
Social Movement Theory 
1 
 
History Elective 
1 
 
Humanities Elective 
1 
 
Experiential Learning Project or Life Credit 
1 
 
Total credits: 
6 
Category Descriptions 
History Elective 

Humanities Elective 

Experiential Learning Project or Life Credit 


Mathematics 
Applied Mathematics (B.S.) 
The specific mission for the major in Mathematics is to produce a well-trained mathematician capable of both research and teaching in general. In particular a Howard University trained mathematician must be comfortable when employed as an actuarial scientist, a computer scientist and/or a mathematician/researcher in schools, government or industry. 
Note: 
*Students should complete one of their divisional requirements within the African American course cluster. 
Type: B.S. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition, English or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year - First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 156 
Calculus I 
4 
CSCI 100 
Intro to Computer Science 
3 
 
Freshman English 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Physical Education (Swimming) - 1 cr 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year - Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 157 
Calculus II 
4 
MATH 101 
Proof and Problem Seminar I 
1 
CSCI 135 
Computer Science I 
4 
 
Freshman English 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year - First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 158 
Calculus III 
4 
MATH 102 
Proof and Problem Seminar II 
1 
MATH 795 
Introduction to Analysis. Writing across the curriculum. 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Foreign Language (4 credits) 
4 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year - Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 159 
Differential Equations 
4 
MATH 180 
Introduction to Linear Algebra 
3 
 
Philosophy Elective 
3 
 
Foreign Language (4 credits) 
4 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year - First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 189 
Probability and Statistics I 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
HUCO 101 
Principles of Speech 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year - Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 164 
Introduction to Numerical Analysis 
3 
 
Specialization Course (3) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year - First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (3) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Specialization Course (3) 
3 
 
Specialization Course (3) 
3 
 
Specialization Course (4) 
4 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year - Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (3) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Specialization Course (3) 
3 
 
General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (4) 
4 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman English 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Physical Education (Swimming) - 1 cr 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Foreign Language (4 credits) 

Philosophy Elective 
May take PHIL 051, 053, or 055. 
PHIL 051 
Principles of Reasoning 
3 
PHIL 053 
Introduction to Philosophy of Science 
3 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies C: Social Sciences (Open to Sophomores) 
AFRO 131 
Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
3 
AFRO 133 
Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
3 
AFRO 191 
Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
ANTH 120 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
3 
CLAS 110 
Blacks in Antiquity 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 199 
Introduction to Urban Economics 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
HIST 030 
Introduction to African History I 
3 
HIST 031 
Introduction to African History II 
3 
HIST 040 
Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
3 
HIST 041 
Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
3 
HIST 150 
Europe to 1815 
3 
HIST 051 
Introduction to European History II 
3 
POLS 003 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
3 
POLS 005 
Introduction to African Politics 
3 
POLS 011 
State and Local Government 
3 
POLS 143 
Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
3 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Specialization Course (3) 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (3) 

Specialization Course (4) 

General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (4) 


Applied Mathematics – Actuarial Science Concentration (B.S.) 
The specific mission for the major in Mathematics is to produce a well-trained mathematician capable of both research and teaching in general. In particular a Howard University trained mathematician must be comfortable when employed as an actuarial scientist, a computer scientist and/or a mathematician/researcher in schools, government or industry. 
Note: 
*Students should complete one of their divisional requirements within the African American course cluster. 
Type: B.S. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition, English or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year - First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 156 
Calculus I 
4 
CSCI 100 
Intro to Computer Science 
3 
 
Freshman English 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Physical Education (Swimming) - 1 cr 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year - Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 157 
Calculus II 
4 
MATH 101 
Proof and Problem Seminar I 
1 
CSCI 135 
Computer Science I 
4 
 
Freshman English 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year - First Semester 
*MATH 164 - Unless the instructor permits an exception, this course requires 159 as a prerequisite. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 158 
Calculus III 
4 
MATH 102 
Proof and Problem Seminar II 
1 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Foreign Language (4 credits) 
4 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year - Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 164 
Introduction to Numerical Analysis 
3 
MATH 180 
Introduction to Linear Algebra 
3 
 
Philosophy Elective 
3 
 
Foreign Language (4 credits) 
4 
HUCO 101 
Principles of Speech 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year - First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 189 
Probability and Statistics I 
3 
MATH 795 
Introduction to Analysis. Writing across the curriculum. 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year - Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 190 
Probability and Statistics II 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year - First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 168 
Actuarial Science Laboratory I 
1 
 
Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (3) 
3 
ACCT 201 
Accounting Principles I 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Senior Year - Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 193 
Actuarial Science Seminar 
3 
 
Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (3) 
3 
 
General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (4) 
4 
 
General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (4) 
4 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman English 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Physical Education (Swimming) - 1 cr 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Foreign Language (4 credits) 

Philosophy Elective 
May take PHIL 051, 053, or 055. 
PHIL 051 
Principles of Reasoning 
3 
PHIL 053 
Introduction to Philosophy of Science 
3 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (3) 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (4) 


Applied Mathematics – Mathematics Education Concentration (B.S.) 
The specific mission for the major in Mathematics is to produce a well trained mathematician capable of both research and teaching in general. In particular a Howard University trained mathematician must be comfortable when employed as an actuarial scientist, a computer scientist and/or a mathematician/researcher in schools, government or industry. 
IMPORTANT: *Students should complete one of their divisional requirements within the African American course cluster. 
In addition, the Praxis I exam should be taken by the end of sophomore year and the Praxis II exam must be taken before doing student teaching. 
Type: B.S. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 156 
Calculus I 
4 
CSCI 100 
Intro to Computer Science 
3 
 
Freshman English 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Physical Education (Swimming) - 1 cr 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 157 
Calculus II 
4 
MATH 101 
Proof and Problem Seminar I 
1 
 
Freshman English 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (2) 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 158 
Calculus III 
4 
MATH 102 
Proof and Problem Seminar II 
1 
MATH 150 
Modern Geometry 
3 
EDUC 210 
Foundations &Urban Education 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 180 
Introduction to Linear Algebra 
3 
CSCI 135 
Computer Science I 
4 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
HUCO 101 
Principles of Speech 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 795 
Introduction to Analysis. Writing across the curriculum. 
3 
EDUC 310 
Educational Psychology and Special Education 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 181 
Discrete Structures 
3 
 
Philosophy Elective 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 189 
Probability and Statistics I 
3 
EDUC 410 
Pedagogy &Content Literacy 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Mathematics Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EDUC 450 
Internship and Classroom Management. 
9 
- 
12 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman English 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Physical Education (Swimming) - 1 cr 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (2) 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Philosophy Elective 
May take PHIL 051, 053, or 055. 
PHIL 051 
Principles of Reasoning 
3 
PHIL 053 
Introduction to Philosophy of Science 
3 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 

Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies C: Social Sciences (Open to Sophomores) 
AFRO 131 
Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
3 
AFRO 133 
Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
3 
AFRO 191 
Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
ANTH 120 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
3 
CLAS 110 
Blacks in Antiquity 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 199 
Introduction to Urban Economics 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
HIST 030 
Introduction to African History I 
3 
HIST 031 
Introduction to African History II 
3 
HIST 040 
Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
3 
HIST 041 
Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
3 
HIST 150 
Europe to 1815 
3 
HIST 051 
Introduction to European History II 
3 
POLS 003 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
3 
POLS 005 
Introduction to African Politics 
3 
POLS 011 
State and Local Government 
3 
POLS 143 
Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
3 

Mathematics Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
 
MATH 006/007 
3 
- 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 020 
Fundamental Concepts of Mathematics for Education I 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
MATH 084-085 
Directed Readings in Honors for Sophomores 
1 
MATH 160 
Advanced Calculus for Science and Engineering 
3 
MATH 161, 162 
Seminar 
1 
- 
3 
MATH 164 
Introduction to Numerical Analysis 
3 
MATH 165, 166 
Directed Readings. 
1 
- 
3 
MATH 168 
Actuarial Science Laboratory I 
1 
MATH 169 
Actuarial Science Laboratory II 
1 
MATH 190 
Probability and Statistics II 
3 
MATH 191 
Foundations of Applied Mathematics 
3 
MATH 192 
Topics in Applied Mathematics 
3 
MATH 193 
Actuarial Science Seminar 
3 
MATH 196 
Introduction to Analysis II 
3 
MATH 197 
Introduction to Modern Algebra I 
3 
MATH 198 
Introduction to Modern Algebra II 
3 


Applied Mathematics – Pre-Med/Pre- Dental Concentration (B.S.) 
The specific mission for the major in Mathematics is to produce a well trained mathematician capable of both research and teaching in general. In particular a Howard University trained mathematician must be comfortable when employed as an actuarial scientist, a computer scientist and/or a mathematician/researcher in schools, government or industry. 
IMPORTANT: *Students should complete one of their divisional requirements within the African American course cluster. 
Type: B.S. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 005 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 101 
Proof and Problem Seminar I 
1 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 
CHEM 006 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
 
General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (6) 
6 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 102 
Proof and Problem Seminar II 
1 
CHEM 145 
Organic Chemistry Laboratory 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (6) 
6 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (6) 
6 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Choose between PHYS 001 and PHYS 002 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
MATH 195 
Introduction to Analysis I 
3 
CHEM 151 
Biochemistry I 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 180 
Introduction to Linear Algebra 
3 
MATH 164 
Introduction to Numerical Analysis 
3 
CHEM 152 
Biochemistry II 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 189 
Probability and Statistics I 
3 
SYCS 135 
Computer Science I 
4 
MATH 160 
Advanced Calculus for Science and Engineering 
3 
BIOL 251 
Comparative Anatomy 
4 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 190 
Probability and Statistics II 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (6) 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies C: Social Sciences (Open to Sophomores) 
AFRO 131 
Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
3 
AFRO 133 
Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
3 
AFRO 191 
Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
ANTH 120 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
3 
CLAS 110 
Blacks in Antiquity 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 199 
Introduction to Urban Economics 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
HIST 030 
Introduction to African History I 
3 
HIST 031 
Introduction to African History II 
3 
HIST 040 
Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
3 
HIST 041 
Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
3 
HIST 150 
Europe to 1815 
3 
HIST 051 
Introduction to European History II 
3 
POLS 003 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
3 
POLS 005 
Introduction to African Politics 
3 
POLS 011 
State and Local Government 
3 
POLS 143 
Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
3 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 


Applied Mathematics – Pure Mathematics Concentration (B.S.) 
The specific mission for the major in Mathematics is to produce a well trained mathematician capable of both research and teaching in general. In particular a Howard University trained mathematician must be comfortable when employed as an actuarial scientist, a computer scientist and/or a mathematician/researcher in schools, government or industry. 
IMPORTANT: *Students should complete one of their divisional requirements within the African American course cluster. 
Type: B.S. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 101 
Proof and Problem Seminar I 
1 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (6) 
6 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 102 
Proof and Problem Seminar II 
1 
SYCS 135 
Computer Science I 
4 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (6) 
6 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 180 
Introduction to Linear Algebra 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 197 
Introduction to Modern Algebra I 
3 
MATH 195 
Introduction to Analysis I 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 196 
Introduction to Analysis II 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Writing Course 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 199 
Introduction to General Topology 
3 
 
Mathematics Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 185 
Introduction to Complex Variables 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
122 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (6) 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Writing Course 

Mathematics Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
 
MATH 006/007 
3 
- 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 020 
Fundamental Concepts of Mathematics for Education I 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
MATH 084-085 
Directed Readings in Honors for Sophomores 
1 
MATH 160 
Advanced Calculus for Science and Engineering 
3 
MATH 161, 162 
Seminar 
1 
- 
3 
MATH 164 
Introduction to Numerical Analysis 
3 
MATH 165, 166 
Directed Readings. 
1 
- 
3 
MATH 168 
Actuarial Science Laboratory I 
1 
MATH 169 
Actuarial Science Laboratory II 
1 
MATH 190 
Probability and Statistics II 
3 
MATH 191 
Foundations of Applied Mathematics 
3 
MATH 192 
Topics in Applied Mathematics 
3 
MATH 193 
Actuarial Science Seminar 
3 
MATH 196 
Introduction to Analysis II 
3 
MATH 197 
Introduction to Modern Algebra I 
3 
MATH 198 
Introduction to Modern Algebra II 
3 

Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies C: Social Sciences (Open to Sophomores) 
AFRO 131 
Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
3 
AFRO 133 
Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
3 
AFRO 191 
Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
ANTH 120 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
3 
CLAS 110 
Blacks in Antiquity 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 199 
Introduction to Urban Economics 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
HIST 030 
Introduction to African History I 
3 
HIST 031 
Introduction to African History II 
3 
HIST 040 
Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
3 
HIST 041 
Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
3 
HIST 150 
Europe to 1815 
3 
HIST 051 
Introduction to European History II 
3 
POLS 003 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
3 
POLS 005 
Introduction to African Politics 
3 
POLS 011 
State and Local Government 
3 
POLS 143 
Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
3 


Music 
Music - Business Concentration - Instrument Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music with Elective Studies in Business degree is a Music Major program in either Performance or Jazz Studies, with additional courses in Business Administration. Auditions are for acceptance into the Performance or Jazz Studies major area. 
The business courses include subjects such as economics, accounting, principles of marketing and statistics. 
The program requires an administrative internship in the arts community during the senior year. 
Senior Recital is required 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Instrument Minor I 
2 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
 
Functional Piano I 
1 
MUSI 110 
Jazz History 
3 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Instrument Minor II 
2 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
 
Functional Piano II 
1 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
***Math Elective - Precalculus or Intro. to Statistics. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (4) 
4 
 
Instrument Minor III 
2 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
MUSB 011 
Adv. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 041 
Adv. Harmony I 
3 
 
Functional Piano III 
1 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
 
Instrument Minor IV 
2 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUSB 012 
Adv. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 042 
Adv. Harmony II 
3 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
 
Functional Piano IV 
1 
MUSE 051 
Piano Proficiency Exam 
0 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor V - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble V - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MGMT 301 
Management & OB 
3 
 
Instrument Minor V 
2 
 
Small Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 016 
Keyboard Harmony 
2 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUSI 001 
Seminar in Music Business 
1 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor VI - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble VI - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (2) 
2 
ACCT 201 
Accounting Principles I 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Instrument Minor VI 
2 
 
Small Ensemble II 
1 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUSD 058 
Instrumental Conducting 
3 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MKTG 301 
Principles of Marketing 
3 
 
Instrument Minor VII 
2 
MUSI 031 
Introduction to Entertainment Law 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
MJFC 410 
Audio Engineering 
3 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Choose PSYC 050 or Philosophy Elective. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Instrument Minor VIII 
2 
MUSI 033 
Entrepreneurship in the Arts 
3 
MUTO 042 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTP 209 
Music Internship 
4 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
122 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Instrument Minor I 

Large Ensemble I 

Functional Piano I 

ENGW 103/105 

Instrument Minor II 

Large Ensemble II 

Functional Piano II 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (4) 

Instrument Minor III 

Large Ensemble III 

Functional Piano III 

Instrument Minor IV 

Large Ensemble IV 

Functional Piano IV 

Instrument Minor V 

Small Ensemble I 

General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (2) 

Instrument Minor VI 

Small Ensemble II 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Instrument Minor VII 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Philosophy (Elective) 

Instrument Minor VIII 


Music - Business Concentration - Jazz Instrument Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music with Elective Studies in Business degree is a Music Major program in either Performance or Jazz Studies, with additional courses in Business Administration. Auditions are for acceptance into the Performance or Jazz Studies major area. 
The business courses include subjects such as economics, accounting, principles of marketing and statistics. 
The program requires an administrative internship in the arts community during the senior year. 
Senior Recital is required 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Instrument Minor I 
2 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
 
Functional Piano I 
1 
MUSH 011 
Improvisation I 
2 
MUSI 110 
Jazz History 
3 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Instrument Minor II 
2 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
 
Functional Piano II 
1 
MUSH 012 
Improvisation II 
2 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
***Math Elective - Precalculus or Intro. to Statistics. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
 
Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (4) 
4 
 
Instrument Minor III 
2 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
 
Functional Piano III 
1 
MUSH 021 
Improvisation III 
2 
MUSI 101 
Jazz Theory I 
3 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
 
Instrument Minor IV 
2 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
 
Functional Piano IV 
1 
MUSE 051 
Piano Proficiency Exam 
0 
MUSH 022 
Jazz Improvisation III 
2 
MUSI 102 
Jazz Theory II 
3 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor V - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble V - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MGMT 301 
Management & OB 
3 
 
Instrument Minor V 
2 
 
Large Ensemble V 
1 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUSH 031 
Improvisation V 
2 
MUSI 001 
Seminar in Music Business 
1 
MUSH 016 
Jazz Keyboard Harmony 
2 
MUSI 183 
Jazz Arranging I 
3 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor VI - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble VI - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ACCT 201 
Accounting Principles I 
3 
 
Instrument Minor VI 
2 
 
Large Ensemble VI 
1 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUSD 058 
Instrumental Conducting 
3 
MUSH 032 
Improvisation VI 
2 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MKTG 301 
Principles of Marketing 
3 
 
Instrument Minor VII 
2 
MUSI 031 
Introduction to Entertainment Law 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
MJFC 410 
Audio Engineering 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Choose PSYC 050 or Philosophy Elective. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Instrument Minor VIII 
2 
MUSI 033 
Entrepreneurship in the Arts 
3 
MUTO 042 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
MUTP 209 
Music Internship 
4 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
 
Total credits: 
128 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Instrument Minor I 

Large Ensemble I 

Functional Piano I 

ENGW 103/105 

Instrument Minor II 

Large Ensemble II 

Functional Piano II 

Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (4) 

Instrument Minor III 

Large Ensemble III 

Functional Piano III 

Instrument Minor IV 

Large Ensemble IV 

Functional Piano IV 

Instrument Minor V 

Large Ensemble V 

Instrument Minor VI 

Large Ensemble VI 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Instrument Minor VII 

Philosophy (Elective) 

Instrument Minor VIII 


Music - Business Concentration - Jazz Piano Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music with Elective Studies in Business degree is a Music Major program in either Performance or Jazz Studies, with additional courses in Business Administration. Auditions are for acceptance into the Performance or Jazz Studies major area. 
The business courses include subjects such as economics, accounting, principles of marketing and statistics. 
The program requires an administrative internship in the arts community during the senior year. 
Senior Recital is required 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
MUSE 111 
Piano Minor I 
2 
MUSH 011 
Improvisation I 
2 
MUSI 110 
Jazz History 
3 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTX 111 
Jazz Piano I 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
19 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
MUSE 112 
Piano Minor II 
2 
MUSH 012 
Improvisation II 
2 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTX 112 
Jazz Piano II 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
***Math Elective - Precalculus or Intro. to Statistics. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (4) 
4 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
MUSH 021 
Improvisation III 
2 
MUSI 101 
Jazz Theory I 
3 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTX 121 
Jazz Piano III 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
MUSH 022 
Jazz Improvisation III 
2 
MUSI 102 
Jazz Theory II 
3 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTX 122 
Jazz Piano IV 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor V - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble V - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MGMT 301 
Management & OB 
3 
 
Large Ensemble V 
1 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUSH 031 
Improvisation V 
2 
MUSI 001 
Seminar in Music Business 
1 
MUSI 183 
Jazz Arranging I 
3 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTX 131 
Jazz Piano V 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor VI - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble VI - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ACCT 201 
Accounting Principles I 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Large Ensemble VI 
1 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
 
Inst or Choral Conducting 
3 
MUSH 032 
Improvisation VI 
2 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTX 132 
Jazz Piano VI 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MKTG 301 
Principles of Marketing 
3 
MUSI 031 
Introduction to Entertainment Law 
3 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTX 141 
Jazz Piano VII 
2 
MJFC 410 
Audio Engineering 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Choose PSYC 050 or Philosophy Elective. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
MUSI 033 
Entrepreneurship in the Arts 
3 
MUTO 042 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
MUTP 209 
Music Internship 
4 
MUTX 142 
Jazz Piano VIII 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
129 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Large Ensemble I 

ENGW 103/105 

Large Ensemble II 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (4) 

Large Ensemble III 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Large Ensemble IV 

Large Ensemble V 

Large Ensemble VI 

Inst or Choral Conducting 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Philosophy (Elective) 


Music - Business Concentration - Jazz Voice Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music with Elective Studies in Business degree is a Music Major program in either Performance or Jazz Studies, with additional courses in Business Administration. Auditions are for acceptance into the Performance or Jazz Studies major area. 
The business courses include subjects such as economics, accounting, principles of marketing and statistics. 
The program requires an administrative internship in the arts community during the senior year. 
Senior Recital is required 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
 
Functional Piano I 
1 
MUSH 011 
Improvisation I 
2 
MUSI 110 
Jazz History 
3 
MUTV 111 
Jazz Vocal Workshop I 
1 
MUTW 111 
Voice for Jazz Studies I 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
 
Functional Piano II 
1 
MUSH 012 
Improvisation II 
2 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTV 112 
Jazz Vocal Workshop II 
1 
MUTW 112 
Voice for Jazz Studies II 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Math Elective - Precalculus or Intro. to Statistics. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
 
Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (4) 
4 
 
Functional Piano III 
1 
MUSH 021 
Improvisation III 
2 
MUSI 101 
Jazz Theory I 
3 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTV 121 
Jazz Vocal Workshop III 
1 
MUTW 121 
Voice for Jazz Studies III 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
 
Functional Piano IV 
1 
MUSE 051 
Piano Proficiency Exam 
0 
MUSH 022 
Jazz Improvisation III 
2 
MUSI 102 
Jazz Theory II 
3 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTV 122 
Jazz Vocal Workshop IV 
1 
MUTW 122 
Voice for Jazz Studies IV 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MGMT 301 
Management & OB 
3 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUSH 031 
Improvisation V 
2 
MUSI 001 
Seminar in Music Business 
1 
MUSH 016 
Jazz Keyboard Harmony 
2 
MUSI 160 
Vocal Arranging I 
3 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTW 131 
Voice for Jazz Studies V 
2 
MUTV 131 
Jazz Vocal Workshop V 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ACCT 201 
Accounting Principles I 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUSH 032 
Improvisation VI 
2 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTV 132 
Jazz Vocal Workshop VI 
1 
MUTW 132 
Voice for Jazz Studies VI 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MKTG 301 
Principles of Marketing 
3 
MUSI 031 
Introduction to Entertainment Law 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTW 141 
Voice for Jazz Studies VII 
2 
MJFC 410 
Audio Engineering 
3 
MUSD 051 
Elementary Choral Conducting 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Choose PSYC 050 or Philosophy Elective. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUSI 033 
Entrepreneurship in the Arts 
3 
MUTO 042 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
MUTP 209 
Music Internship 
4 
MUTW 142 
Voice for Jazz Studies VIII 
2 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
 
Total credits: 
128 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Functional Piano I 

ENGW 103/105 

Functional Piano II 

Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (4) 

Functional Piano III 

Functional Piano IV 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Philosophy (Elective) 


Music - Business Concentration - Piano Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music with Elective Studies in Business degree is a Music Major program in either Performance or Jazz Studies, with additional courses in Business Administration. Auditions are for acceptance into the Performance or Jazz Studies major area. 
The business courses include subjects such as economics, accounting, principles of marketing and statistics. 
The program requires an administrative internship in the arts community during the senior year. 
Senior Recital is required 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
MUSE 111 
Piano Minor I 
2 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
MUSI 110 
Jazz History 
3 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MUSE 112 
Piano Minor II 
2 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Math Elective - Precalculus or Intro. to Statistics. 
**Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
***Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (4) 
4 
MUSE 121 
Piano Minor III 
2 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
MUSB 011 
Adv. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 041 
Adv. Harmony I 
3 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
MUSE 122 
Piano Minor IV 
2 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUSB 012 
Adv. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 042 
Adv. Harmony II 
3 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MGMT 301 
Management & OB 
3 
MUSE 131 
Piano Minor V 
2 
 
Small Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 016 
Keyboard Harmony 
2 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUSI 001 
Seminar in Music Business 
1 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
ACCT 201 
Accounting Principles I 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUSE 132 
Piano Minor VI 
2 
 
Small Ensemble II 
1 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
 
Instrument or Choral Conducting 
3 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MKTG 301 
Principles of Marketing 
3 
MUSE 141 
Piano Minor VII 
2 
 
Elective Ensemble 
1 
MUSI 031 
Introduction to Entertainment Law 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
MJFC 410 
Audio Engineering 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Choose PSYC 050 or Philosophy Elective. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
MUSE 142 
Piano Minor VIII 
2 
MUSI 033 
Entrepreneurship in the Arts 
3 
MUTO 042 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
MUTP 209 
Music Internship 
4 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Large Ensemble I 

ENGW 103/105 

Large Ensemble II 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (4) 

Large Ensemble III 

Large Ensemble IV 

Small Ensemble I 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Small Ensemble II 

Instrument or Choral Conducting 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Elective Ensemble 

Philosophy (Elective) 


Music - Business Concentration - Voice Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music with Elective Studies in Business degree is a Music Major program in either Performance or Jazz Studies, with additional courses in Business Administration. Auditions are for acceptance into the Performance or Jazz Studies major area. 
The business courses include subjects such as economics, accounting, principles of marketing and statistics. 
The program requires an administrative internship in the arts community during the senior year. 
Senior Recital is required 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
MUSG 111 
Voice Minor I 
2 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
 
Functional Piano I 
1 
MUSI 110 
Jazz History 
3 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MUSG 112 
Voice Minor II 
2 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
 
Functional Piano II 
1 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Math Elective - Precalculus or Intro. to Statistics. 
**Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
***Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (4) 
4 
MUSG 121 
Voice Minor III 
2 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
MUSB 011 
Adv. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 041 
Adv. Harmony I 
3 
 
Functional Piano III 
1 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
MUSG 122 
Voice Minor IV 
2 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUSB 012 
Adv. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 042 
Adv. Harmony II 
3 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
 
Functional Piano IV 
1 
MUSE 051 
Piano Proficiency Exam 
0 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MGMT 301 
Management & OB 
3 
MUSG 131 
Voice Minor V 
2 
 
Small Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 016 
Keyboard Harmony 
2 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUSI 001 
Seminar in Music Business 
1 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (2) 
2 
ACCT 201 
Accounting Principles I 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUSG 132 
Voice Minor VI 
2 
 
Small Ensemble II 
1 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MJFC 410 
Audio Engineering 
3 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MKTG 301 
Principles of Marketing 
3 
MUSG 141 
Voice Minor VII 
2 
MUSI 031 
Introduction to Entertainment Law 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
MUSD 051 
Elementary Choral Conducting 
3 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Choose PSYC 050 or Philosophy Elective. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
MUSG 142 
Voice Minor VIII 
2 
MUSI 033 
Entrepreneurship in the Arts 
3 
MUTO 042 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTP 209 
Music Internship 
4 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
122 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Large Ensemble I 

Functional Piano I 

ENGW 103/105 

Large Ensemble II 

Functional Piano II 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (4) 

Large Ensemble III 

Functional Piano III 

Large Ensemble IV 

Functional Piano IV 

Small Ensemble I 

General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (2) 

Small Ensemble II 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Philosophy (Elective) 


Music - Composition Concentration - Instrument Minor (B.M.) 
The composition degree program develops skills required of a music composer and includes courses in orchestration and theoretical studies. 
Composition majors are accepted by audition as instrument, piano or voice minors. 
Upon completion of the second-year requirements with a 3.0 GPA in all theory courses through MUSB-042, students will be admitted to the upper division in the Composition program. 
A senior recital of original compositions will be required of all Composition majors. 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Instrument Minor I 
2 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
 
Functional Piano I 
1 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
 
Instrument Minor II 
2 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
 
Functional Piano II 
1 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Instrument Minor III 
2 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
MUSB 011 
Adv. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 016 
Keyboard Harmony 
2 
MUSB 041 
Adv. Harmony I 
3 
MUSC 010 
Music History I: Antiquity-1680 
3 
 
Music Ed Instr. Family 
1 
 
Functional Piano III 
1 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Instrument Minor IV 
2 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUSB 012 
Adv. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 042 
Adv. Harmony II 
3 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
 
Music Ed Instr. Family 
1 
 
Functional Piano IV 
1 
MUSE 051 
Piano Proficiency Exam 
0 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor V - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble V - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Instrument Minor V 
2 
 
Small Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 103 
Orchestration 
3 
MUSB 124 
Form and Analysis 
3 
MUSB 151 
Composition I 
3 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor VI - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble VI - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Instrument Minor IV 
2 
 
Small Ensemble II 
1 
 
Inst. Conducting 
3 
MUSB 125 
Analysis 
3 
MUSB 152 
Composition II 
3 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Instrument Minor VII 
2 
MUSB 043 
Counterpoint 
3 
MUSB 153 
Composition III 
3 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
 
General Elective 1 Credit (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Social Sciences Div. Elective 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Instrument Minor VIII 
2 
MUSB 154 
Composition IV 
3 
MUTO 042 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Instrument Minor I 

Large Ensemble I 

Functional Piano I 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

ENGW 103/105 

Instrument Minor II 

Large Ensemble II 

Functional Piano II 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Instrument Minor III 

Large Ensemble III 

Music Ed Instr. Family 

Functional Piano III 

Instrument Minor IV 

Large Ensemble IV 

Functional Piano IV 

Instrument Minor V 

Small Ensemble I 

Small Ensemble II 

Inst. Conducting 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Instrument Minor VII 

General Elective 1 Credit (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

Social Sciences Div. Elective 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Instrument Minor VIII 

Philosophy (Elective) 


Music - Composition Concentration - Piano Minor (B.M.) 
The composition degree program develops skills required of a music composer and includes courses in orchestration and theoretical studies. 
Composition majors are accepted by audition as instrument, piano or voice minors. 
Upon completion of the second-year requirements with a 3.0 GPA in all theory courses through MUSB-042, students will be admitted to the upper division in the Composition program. 
A senior recital of original compositions will be required of all Composition majors. 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
MUSE 111 
Piano Minor I 
2 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
 
Music Ed Instr. Family 
1 
MUSE 112 
Piano Minor II 
2 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
MUSB 011 
Adv. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 041 
Adv. Harmony I 
3 
MUSB 116 
Keyboard Harmony 
2 
MUSC 010 
Music History I: Antiquity-1680 
3 
 
Music Ed Instr. Family 
1 
MUSE 121 
Piano Minor III 
2 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUSB 012 
Adv. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 042 
Adv. Harmony II 
3 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
 
Music Ed Instr. Family 
1 
 
Music Ed Instr. Family 
1 
MUSE 122 
Piano Minor IV 
2 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor V - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble V - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Small Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 103 
Orchestration 
3 
MUSB 124 
Form and Analysis 
3 
MUSB 151 
Composition I 
3 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
 
Music Ed Instr. 
1 
MUSE 131 
Piano Minor V 
2 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor VI - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble VI - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Small Ensemble II 
1 
 
Choral or Inst. Conducting 
3 
MUSB 125 
Analysis 
3 
MUSB 152 
Composition II 
3 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUSE 132 
Piano Minor VI 
2 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (2) 
2 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
MUSB 043 
Counterpoint 
3 
MUSB 153 
Composition III 
3 
MUSE 141 
Piano Minor VII 
2 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Social Sciences Div. Elective 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MUSB 154 
Composition IV 
3 
MUSE 142 
Piano Minor VIII 
2 
MUTO 042 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Large Ensemble I 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

ENGW 103/105 

Large Ensemble II 

Music Ed Instr. Family 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Large Ensemble III 

Large Ensemble IV 

Small Ensemble I 

Music Ed Instr. 

Small Ensemble II 

Choral or Inst. Conducting 

General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (2) 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Social Sciences Div. Elective 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Philosophy (Elective) 


Music - Composition Concentration - Voice Minor (B.M.) 
The composition degree program develops skills required of a music composer and includes courses in orchestration and theoretical studies. 
Composition majors are accepted by audition as instrument, piano or voice minors. 
Upon completion of the second-year requirements with a 3.0 GPA in all theory courses through MUSB-042, students will be admitted to the upper division in the Composition program. 
A senior recital of original compositions will be required of all Composition majors. 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
 
Functional Piano I 
1 
MUSG 111 
Voice Minor I 
2 
MUSG 156 
Diction for Singers I 
3 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
 
Functional Piano II 
1 
MUSG 112 
Voice Minor II 
2 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
MUSB 011 
Adv. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 016 
Keyboard Harmony 
2 
MUSB 041 
Adv. Harmony I 
3 
MUSC 010 
Music History I: Antiquity-1680 
3 
 
Functional Piano III 
1 
MUSG 121 
Voice Minor III 
2 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUSB 012 
Adv. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 042 
Adv. Harmony II 
3 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
 
Functional Piano IV 
1 
MUSE 051 
Piano Proficiency Exam 
0 
MUSG 122 
Voice Minor IV 
2 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor V - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble V - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Small Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 103 
Orchestration 
3 
MUSB 124 
Form and Analysis 
3 
MUSB 151 
Composition I 
3 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUSG 131 
Voice Minor V 
2 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor VI - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble VI - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Small Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 043 
Counterpoint 
3 
MUSB 125 
Analysis 
3 
MUSB 152 
Composition II 
3 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUSG 132 
Voice Minor VI 
2 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Choral Conducting 
3 
MUSB 153 
Composition III 
3 
 
Music Ed Instr. Family 
1 
MUSG 141 
Voice Minor VII 
2 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Social Sciences Div. Elective 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUSB 154 
Composition IV 
3 
 
Music Ed Instr. Family 
1 
MUSG 142 
Voice Minor VIII 
2 
MUTO 042 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
 
Total credits: 
122 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Large Ensemble I 

Functional Piano I 

ENGW 103/105 

Large Ensemble II 

Functional Piano II 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Large Ensemble III 

Functional Piano III 

Large Ensemble IV 

Functional Piano IV 

Small Ensemble I 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Small Ensemble II 

Choral Conducting 

Music Ed Instr. Family 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Social Sciences Div. Elective 

Philosophy (Elective) 


Music - Jazz Studies Concentration - Instrument Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music with Elective Studies in Business degree is a Music Major program in either Performance or Jazz Studies, with additional courses in Business Administration. Auditions are for acceptance into the Performance or Jazz Studies major area. 
The business courses include subjects such as economics, accounting, principles of marketing and statistics. 
The program requires an administrative internship in the arts community during the senior year. 
Senior Recital is required 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Instrument Minor I 
2 
MUTI 011 
Jazz Ensemble A I 
1 
MUSH 011 
Improvisation I 
2 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
 
Functional Piano I 
1 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Instrument Minor II 
2 
MUTI 012 
Jazz Ensemble A II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
 
Functional Piano II 
1 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
MUSH 012 
Improvisation II 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
***Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
 
Instrument Minor III 
2 
MUTI 021 
Jazz Ensemble A III 
1 
 
Functional Piano III 
1 
MUSH 021 
Improvisation III 
2 
MUSI 110 
Jazz History 
3 
MUSI 101 
Jazz Theory I 
3 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Instrument Minor IV 
2 
MUTI 023 
Jazz Ensemble A IV 
1 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
 
Functional Piano IV 
1 
MUSE 051 
Piano Proficiency Exam 
0 
MUSH 022 
Jazz Improvisation III 
2 
MUSI 102 
Jazz Theory II 
3 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 111 
Qualifying Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Instrument Minor V 
2 
MUTI 031 
Jazz Ensemble A V 
1 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUSH 031 
Improvisation V 
2 
MUSH 016 
Jazz Keyboard Harmony 
2 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUSI 183 
Jazz Arranging I 
3 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Instrument Minor VI 
2 
MUTI 033 
Jazz Ensemble A VI 
1 
MUSD 058 
Instrumental Conducting 
3 
MUSH 032 
Improvisation VI 
2 
MUSI 077 
Intro to Music Technology II 
3 
MUSI 184 
Jazz Arranging II 
3 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Instrument Minor VII 
2 
MUTI 041 
Jazz Ensemble A VII 
1 
MUSI 031 
Introduction to Entertainment Law 
3 
MUTI 111 
Jazztet I 
1 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Choose PSYC 050 or Philosophy Elective. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Instrument Minor VIII 
2 
MUTI 043 
Jazz Ensemble A VIII 
1 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
MUTI 112 
Jazztet II 
1 
MUTO 042 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Instrument Minor I 

Functional Piano I 

ENGW 103/105 

Instrument Minor II 

Functional Piano II 

Social Science Elective 

Instrument Minor III 

Functional Piano III 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Instrument Minor IV 

Functional Piano IV 

Instrument Minor V 

Instrument Minor VI 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Instrument Minor VII 

Instrument Minor VIII 

Philosophy (Elective) 


Music - Jazz Studies Concentration - Piano Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music with Elective Studies in Business degree is a Music Major program in either Performance or Jazz Studies, with additional courses in Business Administration. Auditions are for acceptance into the Performance or Jazz Studies major area. 
The business courses include subjects such as economics, accounting, principles of marketing and statistics. 
The program requires an administrative internship in the arts community during the senior year. 
Senior Recital is required 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
MUTI 011 
Jazz Ensemble A I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
MUSE 111 
Piano Minor I 
2 
MUSH 011 
Improvisation I 
2 
MUTX 111 
Jazz Piano I 
2 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MUTI 012 
Jazz Ensemble A II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
MUSE 112 
Piano Minor II 
2 
MUSH 012 
Improvisation II 
2 
MUTX 112 
Jazz Piano II 
2 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUTI 021 
Jazz Ensemble A III 
1 
MUSE 121 
Piano Minor III 
2 
MUSH 021 
Improvisation III 
2 
MUSI 110 
Jazz History 
3 
MUSI 101 
Jazz Theory I 
3 
MUTX 121 
Jazz Piano III 
2 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MUTI 023 
Jazz Ensemble A IV 
1 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
MUSE 122 
Piano Minor IV 
2 
MUSH 022 
Jazz Improvisation III 
2 
MUSI 102 
Jazz Theory II 
3 
MUTX 122 
Jazz Piano IV 
2 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 111 
Qualifying Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUTI 031 
Jazz Ensemble A V 
1 
MUSH 031 
Improvisation V 
2 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUSI 183 
Jazz Arranging I 
3 
MUTX 131 
Jazz Piano V 
2 
 
General Elective 1 Credit (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
1 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUTI 033 
Jazz Ensemble A VI 
1 
MUSH 032 
Improvisation VI 
2 
MUSI 077 
Intro to Music Technology II 
3 
MUSI 184 
Jazz Arranging II 
3 
MUTX 132 
Jazz Piano VI 
2 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MUTI 041 
Jazz Ensemble A VII 
1 
MUSD 058 
Instrumental Conducting 
3 
MUSI 031 
Introduction to Entertainment Law 
3 
MUTI 111 
Jazztet I 
1 
MUTX 141 
Jazz Piano VII 
2 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Choose PSYC 050 or Philosophy Elective. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MUTI 043 
Jazz Ensemble A VIII 
1 
MUTI 112 
Jazztet II 
1 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUTX 142 
Jazz Piano VIII 
2 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
MUTO 042 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

ENGW 103/105 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

General Elective 1 Credit (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Philosophy (Elective) 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Social Science Elective 
 
 
 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 


Music - Jazz Studies Concentration - Voice Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music with Elective Studies in Business degree is a Music Major program in either Performance or Jazz Studies, with additional courses in Business Administration. Auditions are for acceptance into the Performance or Jazz Studies major area. 
The business courses include subjects such as economics, accounting, principles of marketing and statistics. 
The program requires an administrative internship in the arts community during the senior year. 
Senior Recital is required 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Functional Piano I 
1 
MUSH 011 
Improvisation I 
2 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTV 111 
Jazz Vocal Workshop I 
1 
MUTW 111 
Voice for Jazz Studies I 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Functional Piano II 
1 
MUSH 012 
Improvisation II 
2 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTV 112 
Jazz Vocal Workshop II 
1 
MUTW 112 
Voice for Jazz Studies II 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
MUSI 110 
Jazz History 
3 
MUSI 101 
Jazz Theory I 
3 
 
Functional Piano III 
1 
MUSH 021 
Improvisation III 
2 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTV 121 
Jazz Vocal Workshop III 
1 
MUTW 121 
Voice for Jazz Studies III 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
MUSI 102 
Jazz Theory II 
3 
 
Functional Piano IV 
1 
MUSH 022 
Jazz Improvisation III 
2 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTV 122 
Jazz Vocal Workshop IV 
1 
MUTW 122 
Voice for Jazz Studies IV 
2 
MUSE 051 
Piano Proficiency Exam 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUSI 031 
Introduction to Entertainment Law 
3 
MUSI 160 
Vocal Arranging I 
3 
MUSH 016 
Jazz Keyboard Harmony 
2 
MUSH 031 
Improvisation V 
2 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTV 131 
Jazz Vocal Workshop V 
1 
MUTW 131 
Voice for Jazz Studies V 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUSI 143 
Vocal Arranging II 
3 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
MUSH 032 
Improvisation VI 
2 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTV 131 
Jazz Vocal Workshop V 
1 
MUTW 131 
Voice for Jazz Studies V 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSD 051 
Elementary Choral Conducting 
3 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUSH 041 
Improvisation VII 
2 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTV 141 
Jazz Vocal Workshop VII 
1 
MUTW 141 
Voice for Jazz Studies VII 
2 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUSI 077 
Intro to Music Technology II 
3 
MUSH 042 
Improvisation VIII 
2 
MUTO 042 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTV 142 
Jazz Vocal Workshop VIII 
1 
MUTW 142 
Voice for Jazz Studies VIII 
2 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
 
General Elective 1 Credit (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Functional Piano I 

ENGW 103/105 

Functional Piano II 

Social Science Elective 

Functional Piano III 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Functional Piano IV 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Philosophy (Elective) 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

General Elective 1 Credit (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 


Music - Jazz Studies Concentration w/ Technology Electives - Instrument Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music with Elective Studies in Business degree is a Music Major program in either Performance or Jazz Studies, with additional courses in Business Administration. Auditions are for acceptance into the Performance or Jazz Studies major area. 
The business courses include subjects such as economics, accounting, principles of marketing and statistics. 
The program requires an administrative internship in the arts community during the senior year. 
Senior Recital is required 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
 
Instrument Minor I 
2 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
 
Functional Piano I 
1 
MUSH 011 
Improvisation I 
2 
MUSI 110 
Jazz History 
3 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
 
Instrument Minor II 
2 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
 
Functional Piano II 
1 
MUSH 012 
Improvisation II 
2 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
***Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Instrument Minor III 
2 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
 
Functional Piano III 
1 
MUSH 021 
Improvisation III 
2 
MUSI 101 
Jazz Theory I 
3 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
MJFC 101 
Introduction to Mass Communications 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Instrument Minor IV 
2 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
 
Functional Piano IV 
1 
MUSE 051 
Piano Proficiency Exam 
0 
MUSH 022 
Jazz Improvisation III 
2 
MUSI 102 
Jazz Theory II 
3 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
MJFC 200 
Intro to Media Production 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Instrument Minor V 
2 
 
Large Ensemble V 
1 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUSH 031 
Improvisation V 
2 
MUSH 016 
Jazz Keyboard Harmony 
2 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUSI 183 
Jazz Arranging I 
3 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Instrument Minor VI 
2 
 
Large Ensemble VI 
1 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUSD 058 
Instrumental Conducting 
3 
MUSH 032 
Improvisation VI 
2 
MUSI 077 
Intro to Music Technology II 
3 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Choose between MJFC 457 or THTT 058. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Instrument Minor VII 
2 
MUSI 032 
Intro Entertainment law 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
MJFC 410 
Audio Engineering 
3 
MJFC 457 
Practicum-Internship: Audio 
1 
THTT 058 
Tech Production I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
 
Ensemble Elective (1) 
1 
 
Instrument Minor VIII 
2 
 
Music Technology Ind. Study (MUSI) 
3 
MUTO 042 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Instrument Minor I 

Large Ensemble I 

Functional Piano I 

ENGW 103/105 

Instrument Minor II 

Large Ensemble II 

Functional Piano II 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Instrument Minor III 

Large Ensemble III 

Functional Piano III 

Instrument Minor IV 

Large Ensemble IV 

Functional Piano IV 

Instrument Minor V 

Large Ensemble V 

Instrument Minor VI 

Large Ensemble VI 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Instrument Minor VII 

Philosophy (Elective) 

Social Science Elective 

Ensemble Elective (1) 

Instrument Minor VIII 

Music Technology Ind. Study (MUSI) 


Music - Jazz Studies Concentration w/ Technology Electives - Piano Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music with Elective Studies in Business degree is a Music Major program in either Performance or Jazz Studies, with additional courses in Business Administration. Auditions are for acceptance into the Performance or Jazz Studies major area. 
The business courses include subjects such as economics, accounting, principles of marketing and statistics. 
The program requires an administrative internship in the arts community during the senior year. 
Senior Recital is required 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
MUTX 111 
Jazz Piano I 
2 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
MUSH 011 
Improvisation I 
2 
MUSI 110 
Jazz History 
3 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MUTX 112 
Jazz Piano II 
2 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
MUSE 111 
Piano Minor I 
2 
MUSH 012 
Improvisation II 
2 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MUTX 121 
Jazz Piano III 
2 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
MUSE 112 
Piano Minor II 
2 
MUSH 021 
Improvisation III 
2 
MUSI 101 
Jazz Theory I 
3 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
MJFC 101 
Introduction to Mass Communications 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUTX 122 
Jazz Piano IV 
2 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
MUSE 121 
Piano Minor III 
2 
MUSH 022 
Jazz Improvisation III 
2 
MUSI 102 
Jazz Theory II 
3 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
MJFC 200 
Intro to Media Production 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUTX 131 
Jazz Piano V 
2 
 
Large Ensemble V 
1 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUSH 031 
Improvisation V 
2 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUSI 183 
Jazz Arranging I 
3 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUTX 132 
Jazz Piano VI 
2 
 
Large Ensemble VI 
1 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUSD 058 
Instrumental Conducting 
3 
MUSH 032 
Improvisation VI 
2 
MUSI 077 
Intro to Music Technology II 
3 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Choose between MJFC 457 or THTT 058. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MUTX 141 
Jazz Piano VII 
2 
MUSI 032 
Intro Entertainment law 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
MJFC 410 
Audio Engineering 
3 
MJFC 457 
Practicum-Internship: Audio 
1 
THTT 058 
Tech Production I 
3 
 
Ensemble Elective (1) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUTX 142 
Jazz Piano VIII 
2 
 
Music Technology Ind. Study (MUSI) 
3 
MUTO 042 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Large Ensemble I 

ENGW 103/105 

Large Ensemble II 

Large Ensemble III 

Large Ensemble IV 

Large Ensemble V 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Large Ensemble VI 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Ensemble Elective (1) 

Philosophy (Elective) 

Social Science Elective 

Music Technology Ind. Study (MUSI) 


Music - Jazz Studies Concentration w/ Technology Electives - Voice Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music with Elective Studies in Business degree is a Music Major program in either Performance or Jazz Studies, with additional courses in Business Administration. Auditions are for acceptance into the Performance or Jazz Studies major area. 
The business courses include subjects such as economics, accounting, principles of marketing and statistics. 
The program requires an administrative internship in the arts community during the senior year. 
Senior Recital is required 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
 
Functional Piano I 
1 
MUSH 011 
Improvisation I 
2 
MUSI 110 
Jazz History 
3 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTV 111 
Jazz Vocal Workshop I 
1 
MUTW 111 
Voice for Jazz Studies I 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
 
Functional Piano II 
1 
MUSH 012 
Improvisation II 
2 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTV 112 
Jazz Vocal Workshop II 
1 
MUTW 112 
Voice for Jazz Studies II 
2 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Functional Piano III 
1 
MUSH 021 
Improvisation III 
2 
MUSI 101 
Jazz Theory I 
3 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTV 121 
Jazz Vocal Workshop III 
1 
MUTW 121 
Voice for Jazz Studies III 
2 
MJFC 101 
Introduction to Mass Communications 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
 
Functional Piano IV 
1 
MUSE 051 
Piano Proficiency Exam 
0 
MUSH 022 
Jazz Improvisation III 
2 
MUSI 102 
Jazz Theory II 
3 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTV 122 
Jazz Vocal Workshop IV 
1 
MUTW 122 
Voice for Jazz Studies IV 
2 
MJFC 200 
Intro to Media Production 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUSH 031 
Improvisation V 
2 
MUSH 016 
Jazz Keyboard Harmony 
2 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUSI 183 
Jazz Arranging I 
3 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTV 131 
Jazz Vocal Workshop V 
1 
MUTW 131 
Voice for Jazz Studies V 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MUSH 032 
Improvisation VI 
2 
MUSI 077 
Intro to Music Technology II 
3 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTV 132 
Jazz Vocal Workshop VI 
1 
MUTW 132 
Voice for Jazz Studies VI 
2 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Choose between MJFC 457 or THTT 058. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSD 058 
Instrumental Conducting 
3 
MUSI 032 
Intro Entertainment law 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTW 141 
Voice for Jazz Studies VII 
2 
MJFC 410 
Audio Engineering 
3 
MJFC 457 
Practicum-Internship: Audio 
1 
THTT 058 
Tech Production I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
 
Ensemble Elective (1) 
1 
 
Music Technology Ind. Study (MUSI) 
3 
MUTO 042 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
MUTW 142 
Voice for Jazz Studies VIII 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Functional Piano I 

ENGW 103/105 

Functional Piano II 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Functional Piano III 

Functional Piano IV 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Philosophy (Elective) 

Social Science Elective 

Ensemble Elective (1) 

Music Technology Ind. Study (MUSI) 


Music - Music Education - Instrument Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music in Music Education degree program provides the training to become a certified teacher of either vocal or instrumental music, grades K through 12, in the District of Columbia. This teaching certificate is reciprocal to more than 30 other states in the United States. 
The Instrumental Emphasis program prepares students for work as Band Directors while the Vocal Emphasis program prepares students as Choral Directors. 
Student Teaching is required in the final semester, and only after all major work has been completed. The following prerequisites must be completed prior to student teaching: 
     • Students must pass Praxis I examination 
     • Students who are not piano minors must pass the Piano 
Proficiency Examination prior to their 7th semester, and in order to achieve Senior classification. 
An average of "B" must be achieved in all Music Education and Education courses. 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
***Choose between MUTC 011 OR Physical Education Elective. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Instrument Minor I 
2 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
MUSD 120 
Contemporary Trends in Music Ed. I 
1 
 
Functional Piano I 
1 
MUTG 011 
Marching Band 
1 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Instrument Minor II 
2 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
MUSD 121 
Contemporary Trends in Music Ed. II 
1 
MUSD 019 
Percussion Instruments 
1 
 
Functional Piano II 
1 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Instrument Minor III 
2 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
MUSB 011 
Adv. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 041 
Adv. Harmony I 
3 
MUSC 010 
Music History I: Antiquity-1680 
3 
MUSD 015 
String Instruments I 
1 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Instrument Minor IV 
2 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUSB 012 
Adv. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 042 
Adv. Harmony II 
3 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
MUSD 016 
String Instruments II 
1 
MUSD 017 
Brass Instruments I 
2 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor V - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble V - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EDUC 210 
Foundations &Urban Education 
3 
 
Instrument Minor V 
2 
 
Small Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 103 
Orchestration 
3 
MUSB 124 
Form and Analysis 
3 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUSD 013 
Woodwind Instruments I 
1 
MUSG 031 
Voice for Instrument Majors 
1 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor VI - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble VI - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EDUC 212 
Educational Psychology: Learning &African American Learners 
3 
 
Instrument Minor IV 
2 
 
Small Ensemble II 
1 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUSD 014 
Woodwind Instruments II 
1 
MUSD 054 
Music in the Secondary Schools 
3 
MUSD 058 
Instrumental Conducting 
3 
MUSE 051 
Piano Proficiency Exam 
0 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EDUC 311 
Special Education and Classroom Management 
3 
EDUC 410 
Pedagogy &Content Literacy 
3 
 
Instrument Minor VII 
2 
MUSB 016 
Keyboard Harmony 
2 
MUSD 006 
Music Education Guitar Class 
1 
MUSD 057 
Teaching and Supervision of Instrumental Music 
3 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EDUC 450 
Internship and Classroom Management. 
9 
- 
12 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
123 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Instrument Minor I 

Large Ensemble I 

Functional Piano I 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

ENGW 103/105 

Instrument Minor II 

Large Ensemble II 

Functional Piano II 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Instrument Minor III 

Large Ensemble III 

Instrument Minor IV 

Large Ensemble IV 

Instrument Minor V 

Small Ensemble I 

Small Ensemble II 

Instrument Minor VII 


Music - Music Education - Organ Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music in Music Education degree program provides the training to become a certified teacher of either vocal or instrumental music, grades K through 12, in the District of Columbia. This teaching certificate is reciprocal to more than 30 other states in the United States. 
The Instrumental Emphasis program prepares students for work as Band Directors while the Vocal Emphasis program prepares students as Choral Directors. 
Student Teaching is required in the final semester, and only after all major work has been completed. The following prerequisites must be completed prior to student teaching: 
     • Students must pass Praxis I examination 
     • Students who are not piano minors must pass the Piano 
Proficiency Examination prior to their 7th semester, and in order to achieve Senior classification. 
An average of "B" must be achieved in all Music Education and Education courses. 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
MUSD 120 
Contemporary Trends in Music Ed. I 
1 
MUSF 111 
Organ Minor I 
2 
MUTL 011 
University Choir I 
1 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
MUSD 121 
Contemporary Trends in Music Ed. II 
1 
MUSF 112 
Organ Minor II 
2 
MUTL 012 
University Choir II 
1 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSB 011 
Adv. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 041 
Adv. Harmony I 
3 
MUSC 010 
Music History I: Antiquity-1680 
3 
MUSD 006 
Music Education Guitar Class 
1 
MUSF 121 
Organ Minor III 
2 
MUTL 021 
University Choir III 
1 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSB 012 
Adv. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 042 
Adv. Harmony II 
3 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
MUSD 005 
Instrumental Survey 
3 
MUSF 122 
Organ Minor IV 
2 
MUTL 022 
University Choir IV 
1 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EDUC 210 
Foundations &Urban Education 
3 
MUSB 124 
Form and Analysis 
3 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUSD 051 
Elementary Choral Conducting 
3 
MUSD 053 
Music in the Elementary School 
3 
MUSF 131 
Organ Minor V 
2 
MUTL 031 
University Choir V 
1 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EDUC 311 
Special Education and Classroom Management 
3 
MUSB 043 
Counterpoint 
3 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUSD 054 
Music in the Secondary Schools 
3 
MUSE 154 
Vocal Accompanying 
2 
MUSF 132 
Organ Minor VI 
2 
MUTL 032 
University Choir VI 
1 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EDUC 212 
Educational Psychology: Learning &African American Learners 
3 
EDUC 410 
Pedagogy &Content Literacy 
3 
 
Ensemble Elective (1) 
1 
MUSB 016 
Keyboard Harmony 
2 
 
Instrumental Methods Elective 
1 
MUSF 141 
Organ Minor VII 
2 
MUSF 153 
Service Playing 
2 
MUSG 031 
Voice for Instrument Majors 
1 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EDUC 450 
Internship and Classroom Management. 
9 
- 
12 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
123 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

ENGW 103/105 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Ensemble Elective (1) 

Instrumental Methods Elective 


Music - Music Education - Piano Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music in Music Education degree program provides the training to become a certified teacher of either vocal or instrumental music, grades K through 12, in the District of Columbia. This teaching certificate is reciprocal to more than 30 other states in the United States. 
The Instrumental Emphasis program prepares students for work as Band Directors while the Vocal Emphasis program prepares students as Choral Directors. 
Student Teaching is required in the final semester, and only after all major work has been completed. The following prerequisites must be completed prior to student teaching: 
     • Students must pass Praxis I examination 
     • Students who are not piano minors must pass the Piano 
Proficiency Examination prior to their 7th semester, and in order to achieve Senior classification. 
An average of "B" must be achieved in all Music Education and Education courses. 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
MUSD 120 
Contemporary Trends in Music Ed. I 
1 
MUSE 111 
Piano Minor I 
2 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
MUSD 121 
Contemporary Trends in Music Ed. II 
1 
MUSE 112 
Piano Minor II 
2 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
MUSB 011 
Adv. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 041 
Adv. Harmony I 
3 
MUSC 010 
Music History I: Antiquity-1680 
3 
MUSD 006 
Music Education Guitar Class 
1 
MUSE 121 
Piano Minor III 
2 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Choose between SEED 005 or Foreign Language Course. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUSB 012 
Adv. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 042 
Adv. Harmony II 
3 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
MUSD 005 
Instrumental Survey 
3 
MUSE 122 
Piano Minor IV 
2 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
SEED 005 
Ed Psych: Childhood and Adolescence 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EDUC 210 
Foundations &Urban Education 
3 
 
Small Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 124 
Form and Analysis 
3 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUSD 051 
Elementary Choral Conducting 
3 
MUSD 053 
Music in the Elementary School 
3 
MUSE 131 
Piano Minor V 
2 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Small Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 043 
Counterpoint 
3 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUSD 054 
Music in the Secondary Schools 
3 
MUSE 132 
Piano Minor VI 
2 
MUSE 154 
Vocal Accompanying 
2 
MUTL 032 
University Choir VI 
1 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EDUC 212 
Educational Psychology: Learning &African American Learners 
3 
EDUC 410 
Pedagogy &Content Literacy 
3 
 
Ensemble Elective (1) 
1 
MUSB 116 
Keyboard Harmony 
2 
 
Instrumental Methods Elective 
1 
MUSE 141 
Piano Minor VII 
2 
MUSE 157 
Piano Pedagogy 
2 
MUSG 031 
Voice for Instrument Majors 
1 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EDUC 450 
Internship and Classroom Management. 
9 
- 
12 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
125 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Large Ensemble I 

ENGW 103/105 

Large Ensemble II 

Large Ensemble III 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Large Ensemble IV 

Small Ensemble I 

Small Ensemble II 

Ensemble Elective (1) 

Instrumental Methods Elective 


Music - Music Education - Voice Minor/General (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music in Music Education degree program provides the training to become a certified teacher of either vocal or instrumental music, grades K through 12, in the District of Columbia. This teaching certificate is reciprocal to more than 30 other states in the United States. 
The Instrumental Emphasis program prepares students for work as Band Directors while the Vocal Emphasis program prepares students as Choral Directors. 
Student Teaching is required in the final semester, and only after all major work has been completed. The following prerequisites must be completed prior to student teaching: 
     • Students must pass Praxis I examination 
     • Students who are not piano minors must pass the Piano 
Proficiency Examination prior to their 7th semester, and in order to achieve Senior classification. 
An average of "B" must be achieved in all Music Education and Education courses. 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
MUSD 120 
Contemporary Trends in Music Ed. I 
1 
 
Functional Piano I 
1 
MUSE 111 
Piano Minor I 
2 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
MUSD 121 
Contemporary Trends in Music Ed. II 
1 
 
Functional Piano II 
1 
MUSG 112 
Voice Minor II 
2 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MUSB 011 
Adv. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 041 
Adv. Harmony I 
3 
MUSC 010 
Music History I: Antiquity-1680 
3 
MUSD 006 
Music Education Guitar Class 
1 
MUSG 121 
Voice Minor III 
2 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSB 012 
Adv. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 042 
Adv. Harmony II 
3 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
MUSD 005 
Instrumental Survey 
3 
MUSE 051 
Piano Proficiency Exam 
0 
MUSG 122 
Voice Minor IV 
2 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EDUC 210 
Foundations &Urban Education 
3 
MUSB 124 
Form and Analysis 
3 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUSD 051 
Elementary Choral Conducting 
3 
MUSD 053 
Music in the Elementary School 
3 
MUSG 131 
Voice Minor V 
2 
 
Small Ensemble I 
1 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EDUC 311 
Special Education and Classroom Management 
3 
MUSB 043 
Counterpoint 
3 
MUSB 116 
Keyboard Harmony 
2 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUSD 054 
Music in the Secondary Schools 
3 
MUSG 132 
Voice Minor VI 
2 
 
Small Ensemble II 
1 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EDUC 212 
Educational Psychology: Learning &African American Learners 
3 
EDUC 410 
Pedagogy &Content Literacy 
3 
 
Instrumental Methods Elective 
1 
MUSG 141 
Voice Minor VII 
2 
 
Ensemble Elective (1) 
1 
MUSG 155 
Solo Vocal Literature 
3 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EDUC 450 
Internship and Classroom Management. 
9 
- 
12 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
123 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Functional Piano I 

Large Ensemble I 

ENGW 103/105 

Functional Piano II 

Large Ensemble II 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Large Ensemble III 

Large Ensemble IV 

Small Ensemble I 

Small Ensemble II 

Instrumental Methods Elective 

Ensemble Elective (1) 


Music - Music History - Instrument Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music in Music History program develops overall music scholarship and hones research skills. 
Students will not be permitted to elect history as a major until they have completed MUSC-010 and MUSC-011 with grades of B or better. Students who major in the history of music must meet the requirements for a minor in vocal or instrumental performance and must appear creditably on student recitals in this subject. Students must maintain a B average in their major subject. At least two major projects must relate to an aspect of the black heritage in music. 
Senior thesis is required. Candidates for graduation will be required to pass an oral examination before a music faculty committee. 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Instrument Minor I 
2 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
 
Functional Piano III 
1 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
HIST 013 
American Military Experience to 1865 
3 
 
Instrument Minor II 
2 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
 
Functional Piano IV 
1 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
 
Instrument Minor III 
2 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
MUSB 011 
Adv. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 041 
Adv. Harmony I 
3 
MUSC 010 
Music History I: Antiquity-1680 
3 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Instrument Minor IV 
2 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUSB 012 
Adv. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 042 
Adv. Harmony II 
3 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
MUSC 103 
The Symphony 
3 
MUSE 051 
Piano Proficiency Exam 
0 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Instrument Minor V - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Small Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FREN 001 
French I 
3 
 
Instrument Minor V 
2 
 
Small Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 016 
Keyboard Harmony 
2 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUSC 105 
Choral Music 
3 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Minor VI - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Small Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FREN 002 
French II 
3 
 
Instrument Minor IV 
2 
 
Small Ensemble II 
1 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUSC 104 
Chamber Music 
3 
MUSC 156 
Music Literature of the Twentieth Century 
3 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
GERM 001 
German I 
3 
 
Instrument Minor VII 
2 
 
Large Ensemble V 
1 
MUSB 124 
Form and Analysis 
3 
MUSC 155 
Style Criteria 
3 
 
Chant to Opera 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
GERM 002 
German II 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Instrument Minor VIII 
2 
 
Large Ensemble VI 
1 
MUSB 043 
Counterpoint 
3 
MUSC 106 
Dramatic Music 
3 
MUSC 201 
Senior Thesis 
1 
MUTO 042 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
 
Total credits: 
121 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Instrument Minor I 

Large Ensemble I 

Functional Piano III 

ENGW 103/105 

Instrument Minor II 

Large Ensemble II 

Functional Piano IV 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Instrument Minor III 

Large Ensemble III 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Instrument Minor IV 

Large Ensemble IV 

Instrument Minor V 

Small Ensemble I 

Small Ensemble II 

Instrument Minor VII 

Large Ensemble V 

Chant to Opera 

Instrument Minor VIII 

Large Ensemble VI 


Music - Music History - Piano Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music in Music History program develops overall music scholarship and hones research skills. 
Students will not be permitted to elect history as a major until they have completed MUSC-010 and MUSC-011 with grades of B or better. Students who major in the history of music must meet the requirements for a minor in vocal or instrumental performance and must appear creditably on student recitals in this subject. Students must maintain a B average in their major subject. At least two major projects must relate to an aspect of the black heritage in music. 
Senior thesis is required. Candidates for graduation will be required to pass an oral examination before a music faculty committee. 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MUSE 111 
Piano Minor I 
2 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
HIST 013 
American Military Experience to 1865 
3 
MUSE 112 
Piano Minor II 
2 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Ensemble III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
MUSE 121 
Piano Minor III 
2 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
MUSB 011 
Adv. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 041 
Adv. Harmony I 
3 
MUSC 010 
Music History I: Antiquity-1680 
3 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Ensemble IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUSE 122 
Piano Minor IV 
2 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUSB 012 
Adv. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 042 
Adv. Harmony II 
3 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
MUSC 103 
The Symphony 
3 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Small Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FREN 001 
French I 
3 
MUSE 131 
Piano Minor V 
2 
 
Small Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 016 
Keyboard Harmony 
2 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUSC 105 
Choral Music 
3 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
General Elective 1 Credit (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Small Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FREN 002 
French II 
3 
MUSE 132 
Piano Minor VI 
2 
 
Small Ensemble II 
1 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUSC 104 
Chamber Music 
3 
MUSC 156 
Music Literature of the Twentieth Century 
3 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Large Ensemble V - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
GERM 001 
German I 
3 
MUSE 141 
Piano Minor VII 
2 
 
Large Ensemble V 
1 
MUSB 124 
Form and Analysis 
3 
 
Chant to Opera 
3 
MUSC 155 
Style Criteria 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Large Ensemble VI - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
GERM 002 
German II 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUSE 142 
Piano Minor VIII 
2 
 
Large Ensemble VI 
1 
MUSB 043 
Counterpoint 
3 
MUSC 106 
Dramatic Music 
3 
MUSC 201 
Senior Thesis 
1 
MUTO 042 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Large Ensemble I 

ENGW 103/105 

Large Ensemble II 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Large Ensemble III 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Large Ensemble IV 

Small Ensemble I 

General Elective 1 Credit (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

Small Ensemble II 

Large Ensemble V 

Chant to Opera 

Large Ensemble VI 


Music - Music History - Voice Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music in Music History program develops overall music scholarship and hones research skills. 
Students will not be permitted to elect history as a major until they have completed MUSC-010 and MUSC-011 with grades of B or better. Students who major in the history of music must meet the requirements for a minor in vocal or instrumental performance and must appear creditably on student recitals in this subject. Students must maintain a B average in their major subject. At least two major projects must relate to an aspect of the black heritage in music. 
Senior thesis is required. Candidates for graduation will be required to pass an oral examination before a music faculty committee. 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MUSG 111 
Voice Minor I 
2 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
 
Functional Piano III 
1 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
HIST 013 
American Military Experience to 1865 
3 
MUSG 112 
Voice Minor II 
2 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
 
Functional Piano IV 
1 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Ensemble III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
MUSG 121 
Voice Minor III 
2 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
MUSB 011 
Adv. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 041 
Adv. Harmony I 
3 
MUSC 010 
Music History I: Antiquity-1680 
3 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Ensemble IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUSG 122 
Voice Minor IV 
2 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUSB 012 
Adv. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 042 
Adv. Harmony II 
3 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
MUSC 103 
The Symphony 
3 
MUSE 051 
Piano Proficiency Exam 
0 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Small Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FREN 001 
French I 
3 
MUSG 131 
Voice Minor V 
2 
 
Small Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 016 
Keyboard Harmony 
2 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUSC 105 
Choral Music 
3 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Small Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FREN 002 
French II 
3 
MUSG 132 
Voice Minor VI 
2 
 
Small Ensemble II 
1 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUSC 104 
Chamber Music 
3 
MUSC 156 
Music Literature of the Twentieth Century 
3 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Large Ensemble V - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
GERM 001 
German I 
3 
MUSG 141 
Voice Minor VII 
2 
 
Large Ensemble V 
1 
MUSB 124 
Form and Analysis 
3 
 
Chant to Opera 
3 
MUSC 155 
Style Criteria 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Large Ensemble VI - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
GERM 002 
German II 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUSG 142 
Voice Minor VIII 
2 
 
Large Ensemble VI 
1 
MUSB 043 
Counterpoint 
3 
MUSC 106 
Dramatic Music 
3 
MUSC 201 
Senior Thesis 
1 
MUTO 042 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
 
Total credits: 
121 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Large Ensemble I 

Functional Piano III 

ENGW 103/105 

Large Ensemble II 

Functional Piano IV 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Large Ensemble III 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Large Ensemble IV 

Small Ensemble I 

Small Ensemble II 

Large Ensemble V 

Chant to Opera 

Large Ensemble VI 


Music - Music Therapy - Guitar Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music in Music Therapy program provides the training for the Music Therapy Board Certification Examination. 
At the end of Freshman year, all Music Therapy students take a guitar barrier exam. Passing the exam is required for continued studies within the Music Therapy major. The exam is taken as part of the Methods and Techniques in Music Therapy course. 
After successful completion of all HU academic requirements, students must complete a Music Therapy Clinical Internship at an AMTA-approved site. Approval from the program coordinator is required to begin the Internship, after which the student will be qualified to sit for the Music Therapy Board Certification Examination. 
Applicants with a baccalaureate degree in music who seek admission to the Music Therapy program will have customized programs designed that fulfill all the requirements for the Bachelor of Music in Music Therapy. An audition, transfer of credits (up to 96 credits of courses with the grade of "C" or better from an accredited 4-year institution), and consultation with the program coordinator are required for acceptance as a transfer student or second bachelor's degree candidate. 
For their senior project, Music Therapy students can either perform a recital on their principal instrument, or do a presentation based on their clinical work and theoretical knowledge. 
Senior project and successful completion of internship are required for graduation. 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
MUSJ 101 
Music Therapy I 
3 
MUSE 110 
Functional Piano I Therapy 
1 
MUSO 111 
Guitar Minor I 
2 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MUSJ 110 
Methods and Techniques in Music Therapy 
2 
MUSJ 111 
Practicum I 
0 
MUSE 120 
Functional Piano II Therapy 
1 
MUSO 112 
Guitar Minor II 
2 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Ensemble III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Choose between MUSC 110 or MUSI 110. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
MUSC 110 
Global Popular Music 
3 
MUSI 110 
Jazz History 
3 
MUSE 130 
Functional Piano III Therapy 
1 
MUSG 031 
Voice for Instrument Majors 
1 
MUSD 019 
Percussion Instruments 
1 
MUSO 121 
Guitar Minor III 
2 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
MUSB 011 
Adv. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 041 
Adv. Harmony I 
3 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Ensemble IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
MUSJ 102 
Music Therapy II 
3 
MUSE 140 
Functional Piano IV Therapy 
1 
MUSE 051 
Piano Proficiency Exam 
0 
MUSG 003 
Voice Instruction 
1 
MUSO 122 
Guitar Minor IV 
2 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUSB 012 
Adv. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 042 
Adv. Harmony II 
3 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Small Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PSYC 116 
Abnormal Psychology 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUSJ 120 
Psychology of Music 
3 
 
Practicum II 
0 
MUSO 131 
Guitar Minor V 
2 
 
Small Ensemble I 
1 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Small Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 102 
Human Anatomy (Majors only) 
3 
HHPL 108 
Human Anatomy Laboratory 
1 
MUSJ 115 
Influence of Music on Behavior 
3 
MUSJ 116 
Practicum III 
0 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUSO 132 
Guitar Minor VI 
2 
 
Small Ensemble II 
1 
MUSD 058 
Instrumental Conducting 
3 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Choose between MUSC 009 or ANTH 110. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
EDUC 331 
Special Education 
3 
MUSC 009 
Intro. to Ethnomusicology 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
SOCI 020 
Introduction to Social Psychology 
3 
MUSJ 122 
Independent Study 
3 
MUSJ 121 
Senior Practicum 
2 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSJ 135 
Music Therapy Internship 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
1 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Large Ensemble I 

ENGW 103/105 

Large Ensemble II 

Large Ensemble III 

Large Ensemble IV 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Practicum II 

Small Ensemble I 

Small Ensemble II 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 


Music - Music Therapy - Instrument Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music in Music Therapy program provides the training for the Music Therapy Board Certification Examination. 
At the end of Freshman year, all Music Therapy students take a guitar barrier exam. Passing the exam is required for continued studies within the Music Therapy major. The exam is taken as part of the Methods and Techniques in Music Therapy course. 
After successful completion of all HU academic requirements, students must complete a Music Therapy Clinical Internship at an AMTA-approved site. Approval from the program coordinator is required to begin the Internship, after which the student will be qualified to sit for the Music Therapy Board Certification Examination. 
Applicants with a baccalaureate degree in music who seek admission to the Music Therapy program will have customized programs designed that fulfill all the requirements for the Bachelor of Music in Music Therapy. An audition, transfer of credits (up to 96 credits of courses with the grade of "C" or better from an accredited 4-year institution), and consultation with the program coordinator are required for acceptance as a transfer student or second bachelor's degree candidate. 
For their senior project, Music Therapy students can either perform a recital on their principal instrument, or do a presentation based on their clinical work and theoretical knowledge. 
Senior project and successful completion of internship are required for graduation. 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Ensemble - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Instrument Minor - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
MUSJ 101 
Music Therapy I 
3 
MUSO 100 
Guitar Instruction 
1 
MUSE 110 
Functional Piano I Therapy 
1 
 
Instrument Minor I 
2 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Ensemble - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Instrument Minor - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MUSJ 110 
Methods and Techniques in Music Therapy 
2 
MUSJ 111 
Practicum I 
0 
MUSO 110 
Guitar Class Therapy 
1 
 
Instrument Minor II 
2 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Ensemble - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Instrument Minor - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
***Choose between MUSC 110 or MUSI 110. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
MUSC 110 
Global Popular Music 
3 
MUSI 110 
Jazz History 
3 
MUSJ 107 
Guitar Techniques for Music Therapy 
2 
MUSG 031 
Voice for Instrument Majors 
1 
MUSD 019 
Percussion Instruments 
1 
 
Instrument Minor III 
2 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
MUSB 011 
Adv. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 041 
Adv. Harmony I 
3 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Ensemble - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Instrument Minor - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
MUSJ 102 
Music Therapy II 
3 
MUTF 111 
Guitar Ensemble I 
1 
MUSE 120 
Functional Piano II Therapy 
1 
MUSE 051 
Piano Proficiency Exam 
0 
MUSG 003 
Voice Instruction 
1 
 
Instrument Minor IV 
2 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUSB 012 
Adv. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 042 
Adv. Harmony II 
3 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Small Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Instrument Minor - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
PSYC 116 
Abnormal Psychology 
3 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUSJ 120 
Psychology of Music 
3 
 
Practicum II 
0 
 
Instrument Minor V 
2 
 
Small Ensemble I 
1 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Small Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Instrument Minor - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 102 
Human Anatomy (Majors only) 
3 
HHPL 108 
Human Anatomy Laboratory 
1 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUSJ 115 
Influence of Music on Behavior 
3 
MUSJ 116 
Practicum III 
0 
 
Instrument Minor VI 
2 
 
Small Ensemble II 
1 
MUSD 058 
Instrumental Conducting 
3 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Choose between MUSC 009 or ANTH 110. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
EDUC 331 
Special Education 
3 
MUSC 009 
Intro. to Ethnomusicology 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
SOCI 020 
Introduction to Social Psychology 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
MUSJ 121 
Senior Practicum 
2 
MUSJ 122 
Independent Study 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSJ 135 
Music Therapy Internship 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
1 
 
Total credits: 
123 
Category Descriptions 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Instrument Minor I 

Large Ensemble I 

ENGW 103/105 

Instrument Minor II 

Large Ensemble II 

Instrument Minor III 

Large Ensemble III 

Instrument Minor IV 

Large Ensemble IV 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Practicum II 

Instrument Minor V 

Small Ensemble I 

Instrument Minor VI 

Small Ensemble II 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 


Music - Music Therapy - Piano Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music in Music Therapy program provides the training for the Music Therapy Board Certification Examination. 
At the end of Freshman year, all Music Therapy students take a guitar barrier exam. Passing the exam is required for continued studies within the Music Therapy major. The exam is taken as part of the Methods and Techniques in Music Therapy course. 
After successful completion of all HU academic requirements, students must complete a Music Therapy Clinical Internship at an AMTA-approved site. Approval from the program coordinator is required to begin the Internship, after which the student will be qualified to sit for the Music Therapy Board Certification Examination. 
Applicants with a baccalaureate degree in music who seek admission to the Music Therapy program will have customized programs designed that fulfill all the requirements for the Bachelor of Music in Music Therapy. An audition, transfer of credits (up to 96 credits of courses with the grade of "C" or better from an accredited 4-year institution), and consultation with the program coordinator are required for acceptance as a transfer student or second bachelor's degree candidate. 
For their senior project, Music Therapy students can either perform a recital on their principal instrument, or do a presentation based on their clinical work and theoretical knowledge. 
Senior project and successful completion of internship are required for graduation. 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
MUSJ 101 
Music Therapy I 
3 
MUSO 100 
Guitar Instruction 
1 
MUSE 111 
Piano Minor I 
2 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MUSJ 110 
Methods and Techniques in Music Therapy 
2 
MUSJ 111 
Practicum I 
0 
MUSO 110 
Guitar Class Therapy 
1 
MUSE 112 
Piano Minor II 
2 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Ensemble III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Choose between MUSC 110 or MUSI 110. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
MUSC 110 
Global Popular Music 
3 
MUSI 110 
Jazz History 
3 
MUSG 031 
Voice for Instrument Majors 
1 
MUSD 019 
Percussion Instruments 
1 
MUSE 121 
Piano Minor III 
2 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
MUSB 011 
Adv. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 041 
Adv. Harmony I 
3 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Ensemble IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
MUSJ 102 
Music Therapy II 
3 
MUTF 111 
Guitar Ensemble I 
1 
MUSG 003 
Voice Instruction 
1 
MUSE 122 
Piano Minor IV 
2 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUSB 012 
Adv. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 042 
Adv. Harmony II 
3 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Small Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PSYC 116 
Abnormal Psychology 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUSJ 120 
Psychology of Music 
3 
 
Practicum II 
0 
MUSE 131 
Piano Minor V 
2 
 
Small Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 116 
Keyboard Harmony 
2 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Small Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 102 
Human Anatomy (Majors only) 
3 
HHPL 108 
Human Anatomy Laboratory 
1 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUSJ 115 
Influence of Music on Behavior 
3 
MUSJ 116 
Practicum III 
0 
MUSE 132 
Piano Minor VI 
2 
 
Small Ensemble II 
1 
MUSD 058 
Instrumental Conducting 
3 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Choose between MUSC 009 or ANTH 110. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
EDUC 331 
Special Education 
3 
MUSC 009 
Intro. to Ethnomusicology 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
SOCI 020 
Introduction to Social Psychology 
3 
MUSJ 122 
Independent Study 
3 
MUSJ 121 
Senior Practicum 
2 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSJ 135 
Music Therapy Internship 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
1 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Large Ensemble I 

ENGW 103/105 

Large Ensemble II 

Large Ensemble III 

Large Ensemble IV 

Practicum II 

Small Ensemble I 

Small Ensemble II 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 


Music - Music Therapy - Voice Minor (B.M.) 
The Bachelor of Music in Music Therapy program provides the training for the Music Therapy Board Certification Examination. 
At the end of Freshman year, all Music Therapy students take a guitar barrier exam. Passing the exam is required for continued studies within the Music Therapy major. The exam is taken as part of the Methods and Techniques in Music Therapy course. 
After successful completion of all HU academic requirements, students must complete a Music Therapy Clinical Internship at an AMTA-approved site. Approval from the program coordinator is required to begin the Internship, after which the student will be qualified to sit for the Music Therapy Board Certification Examination. 
Applicants with a baccalaureate degree in music who seek admission to the Music Therapy program will have customized programs designed that fulfill all the requirements for the Bachelor of Music in Music Therapy. An audition, transfer of credits (up to 96 credits of courses with the grade of "C" or better from an accredited 4-year institution), and consultation with the program coordinator are required for acceptance as a transfer student or second bachelor's degree candidate. 
For their senior project, Music Therapy students can either perform a recital on their principal instrument, or do a presentation based on their clinical work and theoretical knowledge. 
Senior project and successful completion of internship are required for graduation. 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
MUSJ 101 
Music Therapy I 
3 
MUSO 100 
Guitar Instruction 
1 
MUSG 111 
Voice Minor I 
2 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MUSJ 110 
Methods and Techniques in Music Therapy 
2 
MUSJ 111 
Practicum I 
0 
MUSO 110 
Guitar Class Therapy 
1 
MUSG 112 
Voice Minor II 
2 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Ensemble III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Choose between MUSC 110 or MUSI 110. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
MUSC 110 
Global Popular Music 
3 
MUSI 110 
Jazz History 
3 
MUSJ 107 
Guitar Techniques for Music Therapy 
2 
MUSE 110 
Functional Piano I Therapy 
1 
MUSD 019 
Percussion Instruments 
1 
MUSG 121 
Voice Minor III 
2 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
MUSB 011 
Adv. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 041 
Adv. Harmony I 
3 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Ensemble IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
MUSJ 102 
Music Therapy II 
3 
MUTF 111 
Guitar Ensemble I 
1 
MUSE 120 
Functional Piano II Therapy 
1 
MUSE 051 
Piano Proficiency Exam 
0 
MUSG 122 
Voice Minor IV 
2 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUSB 012 
Adv. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 042 
Adv. Harmony II 
3 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Small Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PSYC 116 
Abnormal Psychology 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
MUSD 051 
Elementary Choral Conducting 
3 
MUSI 076 
Intro to Music Technology I 
3 
MUSJ 120 
Psychology of Music 
3 
 
Practicum II 
0 
MUSG 131 
Voice Minor V 
2 
 
Small Ensemble I 
1 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Small Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 102 
Human Anatomy (Majors only) 
3 
HHPL 108 
Human Anatomy Laboratory 
1 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
MUSJ 115 
Influence of Music on Behavior 
3 
MUSJ 116 
Practicum III 
0 
MUSG 132 
Voice Minor VI 
2 
 
Small Ensemble II 
1 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Choose between MUSC 009 or ANTH 110. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
EDUC 331 
Special Education 
3 
MUSC 009 
Intro. to Ethnomusicology 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
SOCI 020 
Introduction to Social Psychology 
3 
MUSJ 122 
Independent Study 
3 
MUSJ 121 
Senior Practicum 
2 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSJ 135 
Music Therapy Internship 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
1 
 
Total credits: 
121 
Category Descriptions 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Large Ensemble I 

ENGW 103/105 

Large Ensemble II 

Large Ensemble III 

Large Ensemble IV 

Practicum II 

Small Ensemble I 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Small Ensemble II 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 


Music - Performance Concentration - Instrument (B.M.) 
The Performance program focuses on developing the skill level and artistry required of a classical concert performer. Majors in Performance will complete the following minimum music requirements: 
     • 8 semesters of private lessons 
     • Qualifying Recital in the Junior Year 
     • Senior Recital in final semester 
     • 8 semesters of participation in large departmental ensemble 
     • 2 semesters of participation in small departmental ensemble 
     • 4 semesters of music theory 
     • 1 semester each of Counterpoint and Form and Analysis 
     • 4 semesters of music history 
     • 4 semesters of class piano (except piano majors and minors) 
     • 1 semester of conducting (instrumental or choral) 
     • 8 semesters of recital attendance 
Additional music requirements in pedagogy and literature are required by each specific major (Orchestral Instruments and Guitar, Piano, Voice). 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Instrument Major I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Instrument Major I 
3 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
 
Functional Piano I 
1 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Major II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Instrument Major II 
3 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
 
Functional Piano II 
1 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Instrument Major III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HUCO 101 
Principles of Speech 
3 
 
Instrument Major III 
3 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
MUSB 011 
Adv. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 041 
Adv. Harmony I 
3 
MUSC 010 
Music History I: Antiquity-1680 
3 
 
Functional Piano III 
1 
MUSE 051 
Piano Proficiency Exam 
0 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Major IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
 
Instrument Major IV 
3 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUSB 012 
Adv. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 042 
Adv. Harmony II 
3 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
 
Functional Piano IV 
1 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Instrument Major V - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble V - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Instrument Major V 
3 
 
Large Ensemble V 
1 
MUSB 016 
Keyboard Harmony 
2 
MUSB 124 
Form and Analysis 
3 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Instrument Major VI - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
**Ensemble VI - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Instrument Major VI 
3 
 
Large Ensemble VI 
1 
MUSB 043 
Counterpoint 
3 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUSD 058 
Instrumental Conducting 
3 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 111 
Qualifying Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Instrument Major VII 
3 
 
Small Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 103 
Orchestration 
3 
MUSD 021 
Instrumental Pedagogy 
3 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Instrument Major VIII 
3 
 
Small Ensemble II 
1 
 
ARTE 080 or MUSI 076 
3 
MUTO 042 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
 
Total credits: 
121 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Instrument Major I 

Large Ensemble I 

Functional Piano I 

ENGW 103/105 

Instrument Major II 

Large Ensemble II 

Functional Piano II 

Instrument Major III 

Large Ensemble III 

Functional Piano III 

Social Science Elective 

Instrument Major IV 

Large Ensemble IV 

Functional Piano IV 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Instrument Major V 

Large Ensemble V 

Instrument Major VI 

Large Ensemble VI 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Instrument Major VII 

Small Ensemble I 

Philosophy (Elective) 

Instrument Major VIII 

Small Ensemble II 

ARTE 080 or MUSI 076 


Music - Performance Concentration - Piano (B.M.) 
The Performance program focuses on developing the skill level and artistry required of a classical concert performer. Majors in Performance will complete the following minimum music requirements: 
     • 8 semesters of private lessons 
     • Qualifying Recital in the Junior Year 
     • Senior Recital in final semester 
     • 8 semesters of participation in large departmental ensemble 
     • 2 semesters of participation in small departmental ensemble 
     • 4 semesters of music theory 
     • 1 semester each of Counterpoint and Form and Analysis 
     • 4 semesters of music history 
     • 4 semesters of class piano (except piano majors and minors) 
     • 1 semester of conducting (instrumental or choral) 
     • 8 semesters of recital attendance 
Additional music requirements in pedagogy and literature are required by each specific major (Orchestral Instruments and Guitar, Piano, Voice). Please refer to the specific course scheme for each major, below. 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Ensemble I - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Large Ensemble I 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
MUSE 211 
Piano Major I 
3 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Ensemble II - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
HUCO 101 
Principles of Speech 
3 
 
Large Ensemble II 
1 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
MUSE 212 
Piano Major II 
3 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Ensemble III - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Large Ensemble III 
1 
MUSB 011 
Adv. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 041 
Adv. Harmony I 
3 
MUSC 010 
Music History I: Antiquity-1680 
3 
MUSE 153 
Vocal Accompanying I 
2 
MUSE 221 
Piano Major III 
3 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Ensemble IV - Courses under subject code MU_ _. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Large Ensemble IV 
1 
MUSB 012 
Adv. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 042 
Adv. Harmony II 
3 
MUSB 116 
Keyboard Harmony 
2 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
MUSE 154 
Vocal Accompanying 
2 
MUSE 222 
Piano Major IV 
3 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 111 
Qualifying Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSB 124 
Form and Analysis 
3 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUSE 171 
Piano Literature 
2 
MUSE 231 
Piano Major V 
3 
 
ARTE 080 or MUSI 076 
3 
MUSZ 111 
Piano Trio (Ens.) I 
1 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSB 043 
Counterpoint 
3 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUSE 171 
Piano Literature 
2 
MUSE 232 
Piano Major VI 
3 
MUSZ 112 
Piano Trio Minor II 
1 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUSE 157 
Piano Pedagogy 
2 
MUSE 241 
Piano Major VII 
3 
MUSZ 121 
Piano Trio (Ens.) III 
1 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Social Sciences Div. Elective 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MUSE 158 
Piano Pedagogy II 
2 
MUSE 242 
Piano Major VIII 
3 
MUSZ 122 
Piano Trio Minor IV 
1 
MUTO 042 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Large Ensemble I 

ENGW 103/105 

Large Ensemble II 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Large Ensemble III 

Large Ensemble IV 

ARTE 080 or MUSI 076 

Philosophy (Elective) 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Social Sciences Div. Elective 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 


Music - Performance Concentration – Voice (B.M.) 
The Performance program focuses on developing the skill level and artistry required of a classical concert performer. Majors in Performance will complete the following minimum music requirements: 
     • 8 semesters of private lessons 
     • Qualifying Recital in the Junior Year 
     • Senior Recital in final semester 
     • 8 semesters of participation in large departmental ensemble 
     • 2 semesters of participation in small departmental ensemble 
     • 4 semesters of music theory 
     • 1 semester each of Counterpoint and Form and Analysis 
     • 4 semesters of music history 
     • 4 semesters of class piano (except piano majors and minors) 
     • 1 semester of conducting (instrumental or choral) 
     • 8 semesters of recital attendance 
Additional music requirements in pedagogy and literature are required by each specific major (Orchestral Instruments and Guitar, Piano, Voice). Please refer to the specific course scheme for each major, below. 
Type: B.M. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.M. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
MUSB 003 
Elem. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 021 
Elem. Harmony I 
3 
 
Functional Piano I 
1 
MUSG 156 
Diction for Singers I 
3 
MUSG 211 
Voice Major I 
3 
MUTL 011 
University Choir I 
1 
MUTO 011 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MUSB 004 
Elem. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 022 
Elem. Harmony II 
3 
 
Functional Piano II 
1 
MUSG 157 
Diction for Singers II 
2 
MUSG 212 
Voice Major II 
3 
MUTL 012 
University Choir II 
1 
MUTO 012 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
GERM 001 
German I 
3 
MUSB 011 
Adv. Ear Tr. I 
2 
MUSB 041 
Adv. Harmony I 
3 
MUSC 010 
Music History I: Antiquity-1680 
3 
 
Functional Piano III 
1 
MUSG 221 
Voice Major III 
3 
MUTL 021 
University Choir III 
1 
MUTO 021 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
GERM 002 
German II 
3 
MUSB 012 
Adv. Ear Tr. II 
2 
MUSB 042 
Adv. Harmony II 
3 
MUSC 011 
Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
3 
 
Functional Piano IV 
1 
MUSG 222 
Voice Major IV 
3 
MUTL 022 
University Choir IV 
1 
MUTO 022 
Student Recital 
0 
MUSE 051 
Piano Proficiency Exam 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MUSB 124 
Form and Analysis 
3 
MUSC 012 
Music History III: The 20th C. 
3 
MUSG 255 
Voice Pedagogy 
3 
MUSG 171 
Opera Ensemble Workshop I 
1 
MUSG 231 
Voice Major V 
3 
MUTL 031 
University Choir V 
1 
MUTO 031 
Student Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUSB 016 
Keyboard Harmony 
2 
MUSB 043 
Counterpoint 
3 
MUSC 008 
African and Afro-American Music Literature 
3 
MUSG 155 
Solo Vocal Literature 
3 
MUSG 232 
Voice Major VI 
3 
MUTL 032 
University Choir VI 
1 
MUTO 032 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 111 
Qualifying Recital 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FREN 001 
French I 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MUSG 172 
Opera Ensemble Workshop II 
1 
MUSG 241 
Voice Major VII 
3 
MUTL 041 
University Choir VII 
1 
MUTO 041 
Student Recital 
0 
THAC 020 
Introduction to Acting: For Non-Majors 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
FREN 002 
French II 
3 
MUSG 242 
Voice Major VIII 
3 
MUTL 042 
University Choir VIII 
1 
MUTO 042 
Student Recital 
0 
MUTO 112 
Senior Recital 
0 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
 
Total credits: 
122 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Functional Piano I 

ENGW 103/105 

Functional Piano II 

Functional Piano III 

Functional Piano IV 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Philosophy (Elective) 


Philosophy 
Philosophy (B.A.) 
A major in philosophy broadens the mind and widens your horizon. It enables students to deal with the fundamental questions of existence by giving them the tools of critical thinking. Philosophy graduates have pursued and are pursuing degrees at the graduate level and in professional schools in fields such as law, mathematics and medicine 
Type: B.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
***Major Elective (Courses under subject code PHIL) 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
ENGL 002 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Humanities Elective (Options: See Elective Group List Divisional Studies A - Humanities) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Philosophy (Courses under subject code PHIL below level 100) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
ENGL 003 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Philosophy 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Mathematics Elec (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
3 
 
Philosophy or English Writing Course 
3 
 
PHIL 175/151/179 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Mathematics Elec (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
3 
PHIL 110 
Classical Ethics 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
PHIL 150 
Epistemology 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
HIST 005/006 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Senior Seminar (TBD after consultation with advisor) 
**Honors Thesis (optional) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Senior Seminar (or other Phil.) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Senior Colloquium or other Philosophy course (optional) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PHIL 200 
Senior Seminar 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
 
Total credits: 
119 
Category Descriptions 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Humanities Elective (Options: See Elective Group List Divisional Studies A - Humanities) 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Philosophy 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Mathematics Elec (Options: Courses under code MATH) 

Philosophy or English Writing Course 
Choose between a Philosophy Writing Course (WRTG) or an English Writing Course. 

PHIL 175/151/179 
Choose between PHIL 175, 151, or 179. 

Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies C: Social Sciences (Open to Sophomores) 
AFRO 131 
Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
3 
AFRO 133 
Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
3 
AFRO 191 
Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
ANTH 120 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
3 
CLAS 110 
Blacks in Antiquity 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 199 
Introduction to Urban Economics 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
HIST 030 
Introduction to African History I 
3 
HIST 031 
Introduction to African History II 
3 
HIST 040 
Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
3 
HIST 041 
Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
3 
HIST 150 
Europe to 1815 
3 
HIST 051 
Introduction to European History II 
3 
POLS 003 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
3 
POLS 005 
Introduction to African Politics 
3 
POLS 011 
State and Local Government 
3 
POLS 143 
Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
3 

Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

HIST 005/006 
Intro Black Diaspora I & Intro Black Diaspora II 

Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor 

Senior Seminar (or other Phil.) 

Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 


Physics 
Physics (B.S.) 
The undergraduate degree in physics is a program created to prepare students to enter graduate studies in physics or to pursue alternative careers in education, industry, medicine, etc. 
IMPORTANT: 
• 
3 Directed Readings can be replaced by one computer/electronic 3-credit course. 

• 
PHYS 702 Satisfies Writing Across the Curriculum (WAC) requirement. 

• 
**Seminar or Elective is Computer/Computational Physics course. 


Type: B.S. 
 
 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 023, 024, 025 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students Laboratory 
1 
MATH 156 
Calculus I 
4 
ENGL 002 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 023, 024, 025 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students Laboratory 
1 
MATH 157 
Calculus II 
4 
ENGL 003 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 158 
Calculus III 
4 
PHYS 015 
Introduction to Modern Physics 
3 
PHYS 023, 024, 025 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students Laboratory 
1 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 159 
Differential Equations 
4 
PHYS 175 
Thermodynamics 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
HUCO 101 
Principles of Speech 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Directed Readings 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PHYS 182 
Physical Mechanics I 
3 
PHYS 178 
Electricity and Magnetism I 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
PHYS 702 
Exper. Physics I Writing 
3 
 
Directed Readings 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Concentration Elective - Physics 
3 
 
Concentration Elective - Physics 
3 
CHEM 004 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Directed Readings 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PHYS 190 
Quantum Physics I 
3 
 
Concentration Elective - Physics 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Thesis - Physics 
1 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Seminar or Elective (Courses level 000 to 299) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Concentration Elective - Physics 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Thesis - Physics 
1 
 
Seminar or Elective** 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Directed Readings 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Concentration Elective - Physics 

Philosophy (Elective) 

Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies C: Social Sciences (Open to Sophomores) 
AFRO 131 
Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
3 
AFRO 133 
Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
3 
AFRO 191 
Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
ANTH 120 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
3 
CLAS 110 
Blacks in Antiquity 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 199 
Introduction to Urban Economics 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
HIST 030 
Introduction to African History I 
3 
HIST 031 
Introduction to African History II 
3 
HIST 040 
Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
3 
HIST 041 
Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
3 
HIST 150 
Europe to 1815 
3 
HIST 051 
Introduction to European History II 
3 
POLS 003 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
3 
POLS 005 
Introduction to African Politics 
3 
POLS 011 
State and Local Government 
3 
POLS 143 
Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
3 

Thesis - Physics 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Seminar or Elective** 


Political Science 
Political Science (B.A.) 
A major in political science enables students to acquire a systematic understanding of the formal and informal political process at all levels, in preparation for a career or graduate study. The program prepares students for careers in government, teaching, and research, and for further study in professional and graduate fields such as law, social work, journalism, business and public administration, and public affairs. 
Type: B.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
***Political Science Major Course (Options: Courses under code POLS) 
****Minor Concentration Course (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
POLS 010 
The National Government of the United States 
3 
 
Mathematics Elec (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
3 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
POLS 002 
Introduction to Research in Political Science 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Writing Course 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
POLS 189 
Black Political Theory 
3 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Political Science Major Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Political Science Major Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Political Science Major Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Health Sciences Elective (Options: Courses in code HLMN) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Political Science Major Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Political Science Major Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Concentration Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Minor Concentration Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Concentration Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Political Science Major Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Political Science Major Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Minor Concentration Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Concentration Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
121 
Category Descriptions 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Mathematics Elec (Options: Courses under code MATH) 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Writing Course 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Political Science Major Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

Health Sciences Elective (Options: Courses in code HLMN) 

Minor Concentration Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies C: Social Sciences (Open to Sophomores) 
AFRO 131 
Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
3 
AFRO 133 
Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
3 
AFRO 191 
Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
ANTH 120 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
3 
CLAS 110 
Blacks in Antiquity 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 199 
Introduction to Urban Economics 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
HIST 030 
Introduction to African History I 
3 
HIST 031 
Introduction to African History II 
3 
HIST 040 
Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
3 
HIST 041 
Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
3 
HIST 150 
Europe to 1815 
3 
HIST 051 
Introduction to European History II 
3 
POLS 003 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
3 
POLS 005 
Introduction to African Politics 
3 
POLS 011 
State and Local Government 
3 
POLS 143 
Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
3 


Psychology 
Psychology (B.S.) 
A major in psychology gives students the opportunity to study the field through examination of significant experiments, theories, and applications. Knowledge of psychology is an important component of a liberal education, in addition to its value in preparing you for graduate work in psychology and related fields. This major will prepare students for an entry-level position in many corporations and government agencies. 
NOTES: Students should meet with a Psychology Faculty Advisor ASAP to stay on track toward graduation... 
Type: B.S. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
***Major Elective (Options: Courses under subject code PSYC) 
****Minor Elective (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Divisional A Course - Recommended: (AFRO Cluster DIV A) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PSYC 016 
Psychology New Student Orientation 
1 
PSYC 001 
Foundations of Psychological Science (Majors/Minors Only) 
4 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
MATH 006/007 
3 
- 
4 
ENGW 102 
Expository Writing & Literacy Studies 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PSYC 002 
Research Design and Analysis 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
ENGW 103 
Persuasive Writing & Research 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*HHPL (Activity) and (Swimming) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PSYC 003 
Statistics I 
4 
 
Foreign Language (Level 2+) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*3rd Writing Course (recommended: PSYC WAC course) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PSYC 064 
Research Methods and Statistics II 
4 
 
Psychology Core Course 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Writing Course 
3 
 
Foreign Language (Level 3+) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Psychology Core Course 
3 
 
Psychology Core Course 
3 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Foreign Language (Level 4+) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Major Elective - PSYC Elective (Cluster 1) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Psychology Core Course 
3 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Major Elective 1 - PSYC Elective (Cluster 2) 
**Major Elective 2 - PSYC Elective (Cluster 3) OR African American Cluster (only required if not previously satisfied) 
***HHPL Elective (Activity) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PSYC 011 
Capstone Senior Seminar 
1 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
HHPL 159/160/175 
1 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Major Elective 1 - PSYC Elective (pick 1 from any cluster) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Major Elective/Senior Research (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
MATH 006/007 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Foreign Language (Level 2+) 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies C: Social Sciences (Open to Sophomores) 
AFRO 131 
Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
3 
AFRO 133 
Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
3 
AFRO 191 
Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
ANTH 120 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
3 
CLAS 110 
Blacks in Antiquity 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 199 
Introduction to Urban Economics 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
HIST 030 
Introduction to African History I 
3 
HIST 031 
Introduction to African History II 
3 
HIST 040 
Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
3 
HIST 041 
Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
3 
HIST 150 
Europe to 1815 
3 
HIST 051 
Introduction to European History II 
3 
POLS 003 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
3 
POLS 005 
Introduction to African Politics 
3 
POLS 011 
State and Local Government 
3 
POLS 143 
Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
3 

Psychology Core Course 

Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

Writing Course 

Foreign Language (Level 3+) 

Philosophy (Elective) 

Foreign Language (Level 4+) 

Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

HHPL 159/160/175 
Choose from HHPL 159, 160, 175 

Major Elective/Senior Research (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 


Sociology 
Sociology (B.A.) 
Sociology is the study of social life and the social causes and consequences of human behavior. The Sociology undergraduate program offers courses such as research methods, statistics, theory, computer based social science research and social organization and demographic analysis. This goal of this program is to equip students for employment in a wide range of occupational fields in the public and private sector, such as social research, the health professions, business, social service, and data processing. Sociology is a popular undergraduate major for students planning to further studies in such professions as law, business, education, social work and public administration. 
Type: B.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
***Major Elective/Sociology Elective (Options: Courses under subject code SOCI) 
****Minor Course (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
ENGL 002 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
HHPL 159/160/175 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 003 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
HHPL 002 
Beginning Swimming 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Writing Course 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
MATH 006/001 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
MATH 007/002 
3 
 
Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 052, 055, 057) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Sociology Elective - Departmental Elective 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Sociology Elective 
3 
 
Sociology Elective 
3 
SOCI 110 
Elementary Statistics 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Sociology Elective - Departmental Elective 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
SOCI 100/700 
3 
SOCI 111 
Sociological Methods 
3 
 
Race, Class, & Gender OR Social Psychology 
3 
 
Sociology Elective 
3 
 
Sociology Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Sociology Elective - Departmental Elective 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Sociology Elective 
3 
 
Sociology Elective 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Sociology Elective - Departmental Elective 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Sociology Elective 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

HHPL 159/160/175 
Choose from HHPL 159, 160, 175 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Writing Course 

MATH 006/001 
Choose between MATH 006 and 001 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

MATH 007/002 
Choose between MATH 007 and 002 

Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 052, 055, 057) 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Sociology Elective 

Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

SOCI 100/700 
Choose between SOCI 100 - Social Theory & Society (3crs) and SOCI 700 - Soc Theory Writing (3crs). 

Race, Class, & Gender OR Social Psychology 


Sociology and Criminology 
Theatre Arts 
Theatre Arts - Acting (B.F.A.) 
The Department of Theatre Arts is committed to the training of knowledgeable theatre artists, theorists, historians, and teachers in the theatre arts. The Department is dedicated to the principle of developing the highest quality of theatre art, and to the serious investigation and perpetuation of the experiences and aesthetics of Black theatre. 
Objectives 
1. 
To train and educate theatre artist-scholars by providing students with a broad-based foundation of theatre process and practice. 

2. 
To provide students with diverse theatre experiences and to investigate and perpetuate the aesthetics of African-American theatre. 

3. 
To provide students with a knowledge of and appreciation for related Fine and Performing Arts disciplines and how they are integrated into the practice of theatre. 

4. 
To provide students with the basic techniques necessary for performance in theatre, film and television. The curriculum for each area of concentration is administered by an Area Coordinator who is appointed by the Chairman of the Department. Students enrolled in a Theatre Arts program shall be advised by the appropriate Area Coordinator. All Theatre Arts students must officially declare an area of concentration and successfully complete an audition and/or interview in that area. 


IMPORTANT: FRSM 001 required for new entrants only, all others must satisfy this credit hour with an elective. 
Basic Stagecraft course only offered in the Spring semester. 
+ Students must check with advisor for honors course equivalents 
Type: B.F.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.F.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THAC 021 
Acting: Techniques I 
3 
THAC 014 
Voice for the Stage 
3 
THAC 025 
Movement for the Stage 
3 
THFD 080 
Play Analysis 
3 
THDN 053 
Fund. of Dance I 
2 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THAC 022 
Acting: Techniques II 
3 
THAC 015 
Diction for the Stage 
3 
THAC 054 
Fund. of Dance II 
2 
 
THTT 058/101 
3 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
THFD 081 
Play Reading 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THAC 023 
Acting Character Scene Study I 
3 
THFD 180 
Theatre History I 
3 
 
PSYC 050 or SOCI 003 
3 
 
THTT 203/057 
3 
 
THTT 207/156 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*THFD 186 (optional) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THAC 024 
Acting Character Scene Study II 
3 
THFD 181 
Theatre History II 
3 
 
THTT 059/102 
3 
 
THTT 105/052/053 
3 
THAC 030 
Beginning Directing 
3 
THFD 186 
Honors Directed Studies 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THAC 120 
Acting: Character Study 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
ENGL 104 
Sophomore Seminar I: Introduction to English Studies 
3 
THAC 001 
Performance Practicum 
1 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THAC 121 
Acting Character Scene Study IV/Lab 
3 
THAC 017 
Speech for the Microphone 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
THFD 203 
Shakespeare/Actors 
3 
THAC 209 
Drama Internship 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THAC 122 
Acting: Styles I 
3 
THAC 106 
Acting for Television & Film 
3 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THAC 130 
Rehearsal & Performance/Lab 
6 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

THTT 058/101 
Choose between THTT 058 and THTT 101 

PSYC 050 or SOCI 003 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
SOCI 003 
Social Problems 
3 

THTT 203/057 
Choose between THTT 203 and THTT 057 

THTT 207/156 
Choose between THTT 207 and THTT 156 

THTT 059/102 
Choose between THTT 059 and THTT 102 

THTT 105/052/053 
Choose between THTT 105, 052, or 053 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 


Theatre Arts - Dance (B.F.A.) 
The Department of Theatre Arts is committed to the training of knowledgeable theatre artists, theorists, historians, and teachers in the theatre arts. The Department is dedicated to the principle of developing the highest quality of theatre art, and to the serious investigation and perpetuation of the experiences and aesthetics of Black theatre. 
Objectives 
1. 
To train and educate theatre artist-scholars by providing students with a broad-based foundation of theatre process and practice. 

2. 
To provide students with diverse theatre experiences and to investigate and perpetuate the aesthetics of African-American theatre. 

3. 
To provide students with a knowledge of and appreciation for related Fine and Performing Arts disciplines and how they are integrated into the practice of theatre. 

4. 
To provide students with the basic techniques necessary for performance in theatre, film and television. The curriculum for each area of concentration is administered by an Area Coordinator who is appointed by the Chairman of the Department. Students enrolled in a Theatre Arts program shall be advised by the appropriate Area Coordinator.  All Theatre Arts students must officially declare an area of concentration and successfully complete an audition and/or interview in that area. 


FRSM 001 REQUIRED FOR NEW ENTRANTS ONLY, HOWEVER, ALL OTHERS MUST SATISFY THIS CREDIT HOUR REQUIREMENT WITH AN ELECTIVE. 
THTT 052 Course offered in the SPRING SEMESTER ONLY. 
^ALL THEATRE ARTS ADMINISTRATION MAJORS ARE REQUIRED TO SERVE AS AN ASSISTANT STAGE MANAGER and/or A STAGE MANAGER AT LEAST ONCE PRIOR TO GRADUATION. 
NOTE: Many of the courses listed have laboratory hours. Laboratory hours allow for practical application of the theoretical approach addressed in both classroom exercise and lectures. Lab hours vary depending on the expectations and/or demands of the class/production. All students should anticipate committing additional time outside of classroom instruction for Lab work. 
+Honors Students are required to take THFD-186 – Directed Study AND ++THFD-187 Honors Thesis 
*RESTRICTED ELECTIVES: HUCO-410 Conflict Mgmt & Negotiation Strategy; JOUR-206 Intro. To Advertising; THFD-081 Play Reading; 
THTA-206 Entrepreneurship in the Entertainment Industry; MKTG-360 Computer Applications in Marketing; MKTG-370 Services Marketing 
Elective/Hnr.s Course JUNIOR OR SENIOR LEVEL STUDENT ONLY OR WITH CONSENT OF COURSE INSTRUCTOR. 
NOTE: STUDENTS ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE TOTAL NUMBER OF HOURS FOR GRADUATION. IF A COURSE IS NOT OFFERED, THE STUDENT MUST MAKE-UP THE HOURS IN COURSES APPROVED BY THE COORDINATOR. STUDENTS MUST FOLLOW THE CURRICULUM SCHEME AS PRINTED OR THEY MAY JEOPARDIZE THEIR GRADUATING WITHIN A 4-YEAR TIME PERIOD. 
Type: B.F.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGW)  
Type: 
B.F.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THDN 076 
Dance Techniques I 
2 
THDN 067 
Kines Charact Dev. & Storytelling 
3 
 
THFD 201 or NUTR 106 
3 
 
ENGW 101/102 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THDN 077 
Dance Techniques II 
2 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
ENGW 103 
Persuasive Writing & Research 
3 
THTT 057 
Stage Make-up/Lab 
3 
THDN 021 
Dance Composition I 
2 
THDN 199 
Dance/Theatre Practicum 
1 
HHPL 002 
Beginning Swimming 
1 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THDN 007 
Ballet I (Dance Mjrs) 
2 
THDN 015 
African Dance I 
2 
THDN 031 
Anatomy & Kinesiology 
3 
THDN 022 
Dance Composition II 
2 
THDN 001 
Modern Dance Technique I 
2 
THDN 029 
Dance History I 
3 
THTT 205 
Lighting the Dance 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THDN 008 
Ballet II 
2 
THDN 037 
Methods of Teaching Dance 
3 
THDN 002 
Modern Dance Technique II 
2 
THTT 207 
Stage Management 
3 
THDN 016 
African Dance II 
2 
THDN 023 
Dance Composition III 
2 
 
PSYC 050 or SOCI 020 
3 
THDN 030 
Dance History II 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THDN 009 
Ballet III 
2 
THDN 024 
Dance Composition IV 
2 
THDN 003 
Modern Dance Technique III 
2 
THDN 017 
African Dance III 
2 
THMT 041 
Int to Theory for Music Thea 
3 
THDN 062 
Contemporary Trends in Dance I 
2 
 
ARTH 161/164 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THDN 010 
Ballet IV 
2 
THDN 004 
Modern Dance Technique IV 
2 
THDN 046 
African Dance III 
2 
THDN 075 
Contemporary Trends in Dance II 
2 
THDN 071 
Dance Major Movement Tech. 
2 
THDN 200 
Dance Technical Production I 
1 
 
HHPL 011/061 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THAT 191 
Fundraising for the Arts 
3 
THDN 065 
Beginning Tap 
2 
THMT 067 
Beginning Jazz 
2 
THDN 036 
Dance Senior Seminar I 
2 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THAT 191 
Fundraising for the Arts 
3 
THDN 065 
Beginning Tap 
2 
THMT 067 
Beginning Jazz 
2 
THDN 036 
Dance Senior Seminar I 
2 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
THFD 201 or NUTR 106 
Choose between THFD 201 or NUTR 106 

ENGW 101/102 
Choose between ENGW 101 OR ENGW 102 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

PSYC 050 or SOCI 020 
Choose between PSYC 050: Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) (3crs) and SOCI 020: Introduction to Social Psychology (3crs). 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
SOCI 020 
Introduction to Social Psychology 
3 

ARTH 161/164 
Choose between ARTH 161 OR ARTH 164 

HHPL 011/061 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 


Theatre Arts - Design and Technical Management (B.F.A.) 
The Department of Theatre Arts is committed to the training of knowledgeable theatre artists, theorists, historians, and teachers in the theatre arts. The Department is dedicated to the principle of developing the highest quality of theatre art, and to the serious investigation and perpetuation of the experiences and aesthetics of Black theatre. 
Objectives 
1. 
To train and educate theatre artist-scholars by providing students with a broad-based foundation of theatre process and practice. 

2. 
To provide students with diverse theatre experiences and to investigate and perpetuate the aesthetics of African-American theatre. 

3. 
To provide students with a knowledge of and appreciation for related Fine and Performing Arts disciplines and how they are integrated into the practice of theatre. 

4. 
To provide students with the basic techniques necessary for performance in theatre, film and television. The curriculum for each area of concentration is administered by an Area Coordinator who is appointed by the Chairman of the Department. Students enrolled in a Theatre Arts program shall be advised by the appropriate Area Coordinator.  All Theatre Arts students must officially declare an area of concentration and successfully complete an audition and/or interview in that area. 


FRSM 001 REQUIRED FOR NEW ENTRANTS ONLY, HOWEVER, ALL OTHERS MUST SATISFY THIS CREDIT HOUR REQUIREMENT WITH AN ELECTIVE. 
THTT 052 Course offered in the SPRING SEMESTER ONLY. 
^ALL THEATRE ARTS ADMINISTRATION MAJORS ARE REQUIRED TO SERVE AS AN ASSISTANT STAGE MANAGER and/or A STAGE MANAGER AT LEAST ONCE PRIOR TO GRADUATION. 
NOTE: Many of the courses listed have laboratory hours. Laboratory hours allow for practical application of the theoretical approach addressed in both classroom exercise and lectures. Lab hours vary depending on the expectations and/or demands of the class/production. All students should anticipate committing additional time outside of classroom instruction for Lab work. 
+Honors Students are required to take THFD-186 – Directed Study AND ++THFD-187 Honors Thesis 
*RESTRICTED ELECTIVES: HUCO-410 Conflict Mgmt & Negotiation Strategy; JOUR-206 Intro. To Advertising; THFD-081 Play Reading; 
THTA-206 Entrepreneurship in the Entertainment Industry; MKTG-360 Computer Applications in Marketing; MKTG-370 Services Marketing 
Elective/Hnr.s Course JUNIOR OR SENIOR LEVEL STUDENT ONLY OR WITH CONSENT OF COURSE INSTRUCTOR. 
NOTE: STUDENTS ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE TOTAL NUMBER OF HOURS FOR GRADUATION. IF A COURSE IS NOT OFFERED, THE STUDENT MUST MAKE-UP THE HOURS IN COURSES APPROVED BY THE COORDINATOR. STUDENTS MUST FOLLOW THE CURRICULUM SCHEME AS PRINTED OR THEY MAY JEOPARDIZE THEIR GRADUATING WITHIN A 4-YEAR TIME PERIOD. 
Type: B.F.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGW)  
Type: 
B.F.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
THTT 101/102 
3 
THTT 103 
Hand Drafting 
3 
THTT 105 
Intro to Design 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
ENGW 101/102 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
THTT 101/102 
3 
THTT 104 
Computer Aided Drafting 
3 
THTT 106 
Drawing & Painting Skills 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
ENGW 103 
Persuasive Writing & Research 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
THTT 201/202 
3 
 
THTT 203/205/207 
3 
THFD 180 
Theatre History I 
3 
THFD 080 
Play Analysis 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
THTT 201/202 
3 
 
THTT 204/208 
3 
THFD 181 
Theatre History II 
3 
THAC 030 
Beginning Directing 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THTT 301 
Design Tech Practicum I 
3 
THTT 303 
Design Studio I 
3 
THTT 305 
Period Styles I 
3 
 
THTT 307/309/311 
3 
THTT 313 
Portfolio 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THTT 302 
Design/Tech Practicum II 
3 
THTT 304 
Design Studio II 
3 
THTT 306 
Period Styles II 
3 
 
THTT 308/312 - THTA 094 
3 
THTT 314 
Business Show: Theatre Design & Stage Management 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THTT 401 
Design/Tech Practicum III 
3 
THTT 403 
Design Studio III 
3 
 
THTT 405/407 
3 
THTT 409 
Design/Tech/Management Internship 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THTT 402 
Design/Tech Practicum IV 
3 
THTT 404 
Design Studio IV 
3 
THTT 406 
Electronic Visualization 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
THTT 101/102 

ENGW 101/102 
Choose between ENGW 101 OR ENGW 102 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

THTT 201/202 

THTT 203/205/207 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

THTT 204/208 

THTT 307/309/311 

THTT 308/312 - THTA 094 
Choose between THTT 308, THTT 312, or THTA 094. 

THTT 405/407 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 


Theatre Arts - Musical Theatre (B.F.A.) 
The Department of Theatre Arts is committed to the training of knowledgeable theatre artists, theorists, historians, and teachers in the theatre arts. The Department is dedicated to the principle of developing the highest quality of theatre art, and to the serious investigation and perpetuation of the experiences and aesthetics of Black theatre. 
Objectives 
1. 
To train and educate theatre artist-scholars by providing students with a broad-based foundation of theatre process and practice. 

2. 
To provide students with diverse theatre experiences and to investigate and perpetuate the aesthetics of African-American theatre. 

3. 
To provide students with a knowledge of and appreciation for related Fine and Performing Arts disciplines and how they are integrated into the practice of theatre. 

4. 
To provide students with the basic techniques necessary for performance in theatre, film and television. The curriculum for each area of concentration is administered by an Area Coordinator who is appointed by the Chairman of the Department. Students enrolled in a Theatre Arts program shall be advised by the appropriate Area Coordinator.  All Theatre Arts students must officially declare an area of concentration and successfully complete an audition and/or interview in that area. 


FRSM 001 REQUIRED FOR NEW ENTRANTS ONLY, HOWEVER, ALL OTHERS MUST SATISFY THIS CREDIT HOUR REQUIREMENT WITH AN ELECTIVE. 
THTT 052 Course offered in the SPRING SEMESTER ONLY. 
^ALL THEATRE ARTS ADMINISTRATION MAJORS ARE REQUIRED TO SERVE AS AN ASSISTANT STAGE MANAGER and/or A STAGE MANAGER AT LEAST ONCE PRIOR TO GRADUATION. 
NOTE: Many of the courses listed have laboratory hours. Laboratory hours allow for practical application of the theoretical approach addressed in both classroom exercise and lectures. Lab hours vary depending on the expectations and/or demands of the class/production. All students should anticipate committing additional time outside of classroom instruction for Lab work. 
+Honors Students are required to take THFD-186 – Directed Study AND ++THFD-187 Honors Thesis 
*RESTRICTED ELECTIVES: HUCO-410 Conflict Mgmt & Negotiation Strategy; JOUR-206 Intro. To Advertising; THFD-081 Play Reading; 
THTA-206 Entrepreneurship in the Entertainment Industry; MKTG-360 Computer Applications in Marketing; MKTG-370 Services Marketing 
Elective/Hnr.s Course JUNIOR OR SENIOR LEVEL STUDENT ONLY OR WITH CONSENT OF COURSE INSTRUCTOR. 
NOTE: STUDENTS ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE TOTAL NUMBER OF HOURS FOR GRADUATION. IF A COURSE IS NOT OFFERED, THE STUDENT MUST MAKE-UP THE HOURS IN COURSES APPROVED BY THE COORDINATOR. STUDENTS MUST FOLLOW THE CURRICULUM SCHEME AS PRINTED OR THEY MAY JEOPARDIZE THEIR GRADUATING WITHIN A 4-YEAR TIME PERIOD. 
Type: B.F.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGW)  
Type: 
B.F.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
ENGL 002 
Freshman Composition 
3 
THAC 021 
Acting: Techniques I 
3 
THDN 053 
Fund. of Dance I 
2 
THMT 111 
Voice for Musical Theatre I 
1 
THMT 301 
Piano for Musical Theatre I 
1 
THMT 041 
Int to Theory for Music Thea 
3 
 
THTT 058/101 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Psychology or Sociology 
3 
ENGL 003 
Freshman Composition 
3 
THAC 022 
Acting: Techniques II 
3 
THDN 054 
Dance Fundamentals II 
2 
THMT 112 
Voice for Musical Theatre II 
1 
THMT 302 
Piano for Musical Theatre II 
1 
THMT 042 
Ear Training / Sight Singing for Musical Theatre I 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THAC 023 
Acting Character Scene Study I 
3 
THDN 055 
Dance Fundamentals III 
2 
THMT 113 
Voice for Musical Theatre III 
1 
THMT 043 
Ear Training / Sight Singing for Musical Theatre II 
2 
THAC 015 
Diction for the Stage 
3 
 
THTT 059/102 
3 
 
THTT 057/203 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THAC 024 
Acting Character Scene Study II 
3 
THDN 056 
Dance Fundamentals IV 
2 
THMT 114 
Voice for Musical Theatre IV 
1 
THMT 044 
Musical Theatre Standards 
2 
THFD 080 
Play Analysis 
3 
 
THTT 105/052/053 
3 
THMT 105 
History of Music Theatre 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THMT 028 
Character/Scene Study III - MT Majors 
3 
THDN 065 
Beginning Tap 
2 
THMT 115 
Voice for Musical Theatre V 
1 
THMT 101 
Musical Theatre Techniques I (THMT 101) 
3 
THFD 180 
Theatre History I 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THMT 029 
Acting Character Scene Study IV - MT Majors 
3 
THDN 066 
Tap II 
2 
THMT 116 
Voice for Musical Theatre 
1 
THMT 102 
Musical Theatre Techniques II 
3 
THFD 181 
Theatre History II 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 009 
Technical Writing, Pre-Professional 
3 
THMT 067 
Beginning Jazz 
2 
THMT 117 
Voice for Musical Theatre VII 
1 
THMT 102 
Musical Theatre Techniques II 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
THMT 068 
Jazz II 
2 
THMT 118 
Voice for Musical Theatre VIII 
1 
THMT 104 
Musical Theatre Techniques IV 
3 
 
Restricted (Elective) - Music Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
THTT 058/101 
Choose between THTT 058 and THTT 101 

Psychology or Sociology 

THTT 059/102 
Choose between THTT 059 and THTT 102 

THTT 057/203 

THTT 105/052/053 
Choose between THTT 105, 052, or 053 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Restricted (Elective) - Music Elective 


Theatre Arts - Theatre Administration (B.F.A.) 
The Department of Theatre Arts is committed to the training of knowledgeable theatre artists, theorists, historians, and teachers in the theatre arts. The Department is dedicated to the principle of developing the highest quality of theatre art, and to the serious investigation and perpetuation of the experiences and aesthetics of Black theatre. 
Objectives 
1. 
To train and educate theatre artist-scholars by providing students with a broad-based foundation of theatre process and practice. 

2. 
To provide students with diverse theatre experiences and to investigate and perpetuate the aesthetics of African-American theatre. 

3. 
To provide students with a knowledge of and appreciation for related Fine and Performing Arts disciplines and how they are integrated into the practice of theatre. 

4. 
To provide students with the basic techniques necessary for performance in theatre, film and television. The curriculum for each area of concentration is administered by an Area Coordinator who is appointed by the Chairman of the Department. Students enrolled in a Theatre Arts program shall be advised by the appropriate Area Coordinator.  All Theatre Arts students must officially declare an area of concentration and successfully complete an audition and/or interview in that area. 


FRSM 001 REQUIRED FOR NEW ENTRANTS ONLY, HOWEVER, ALL OTHERS MUST SATISFY THIS CREDIT HOUR REQUIREMENT WITH AN ELECTIVE. 
THTT 052 Course offered in the SPRING SEMESTER ONLY. 
^ALL THEATRE ARTS ADMINISTRATION MAJORS ARE REQUIRED TO SERVE AS AN ASSISTANT STAGE MANAGER and/or A STAGE MANAGER AT LEAST ONCE PRIOR TO GRADUATION. 
NOTE: Many of the courses listed have laboratory hours. Laboratory hours allow for practical application of the theoretical approach addressed in both classroom exercise and lectures. Lab hours vary depending on the expectations and/or demands of the class/production. All students should anticipate committing additional time outside of classroom instruction for Lab work. 
+Honors Students are required to take THFD-186 – Directed Study AND ++THFD-187 Honors Thesis 
*RESTRICTED ELECTIVES: HUCO-410 Conflict Mgmt & Negotiation Strategy; JOUR-206 Intro. To Advertising; THFD-081 Play Reading; 
THTA-206 Entrepreneurship in the Entertainment Industry; MKTG-360 Computer Applications in Marketing; MKTG-370 Services Marketing 
Elective/Hnr.s Course JUNIOR OR SENIOR LEVEL STUDENT ONLY OR WITH CONSENT OF COURSE INSTRUCTOR. 
NOTE: STUDENTS ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE TOTAL NUMBER OF HOURS FOR GRADUATION. IF A COURSE IS NOT OFFERED, THE STUDENT MUST MAKE-UP THE HOURS IN COURSES APPROVED BY THE COORDINATOR. STUDENTS MUST FOLLOW THE CURRICULUM SCHEME AS PRINTED OR THEY MAY JEOPARDIZE THEIR GRADUATING WITHIN A 4-YEAR TIME PERIOD. 
Type: B.F.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGW)  
Type: 
B.F.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THTA 090 
Introduction to Theatre Management I 
3 
 
THTT 058/101 
3 
THTT 105 
Intro to Design 
3 
 
ENGW 101/102 
3 
THFD 080 
Play Analysis 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THTA 091 
Introduction to Theatre Management II 
3 
 
THTT 059/102 
3 
THTA 156 
Stage Management 
3 
ENGW 103 
Persuasive Writing & Research 
3 
 
THTT 203/204 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THAC 020 
Introduction to Acting: For Non-Majors 
3 
THTA 001 
Theatre Arts Administration Lab 
1 
THTA 212 
Human Resources Management 
3 
THDN 300 
Dance for Non-Majors 
2 
ECON 180 
Statistics for Business and Economics 
3 
 
THFD 180 OR THDN 029 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THTA 208 
Finance Management 
3 
THTA 002 
Theatre Arts Administration Lab II 
1 
 
THFD 181 OR THDN 030 
3 
ENGL 009 
Technical Writing, Pre-Professional 
3 
HUCO 101 
Principles of Speech 
3 
 
Restricted Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THAC 030 
Beginning Directing 
3 
THTA 003 
Theatre Arts Administration Lab III 
1 
SLMC 210 
Intro to Strategic Communication 
3 
THTA 211 
Arts & Innovation 
3 
THTA 094 
Production Management 
3 
 
THTT 203/204 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THTA 207 
Leading in a Changing Society 
3 
THTA 004 
Theatre Arts Administration Lab IV 
1 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
MJFC 200 
Intro to Media Production 
3 
 
PSYC 050 or SOCI 020 
3 
 
Restricted Elec. or Honors Course 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THTA 191 
Fundraising for the Arts 
3 
THTA 209 
Drama Internship 
3 
MUSI 032 
Intro Entertainment law 
3 
THTA 005 
Theatre Arts Administration V 
2 
 
Restricted Elec. or Honors Course 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 
THTA 190 
Seminar in Theatre Administration 
3 
 
THAT 089 OR PHIL 055 OR THFD 081 
3 
 
Restricted Elec. or Honors Course 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
THTT 058/101 
Choose between THTT 058 and THTT 101 

ENGW 101/102 
Choose between ENGW 101 OR ENGW 102 

THTT 059/102 
Choose between THTT 059 and THTT 102 

THTT 203/204 
Choose between THTT 203 OR THTT 204 

THFD 180 OR THDN 029 
Choose between THFD 180 or THDN 029 

THFD 181 OR THDN 030 
Choose between THFD 181 OR THDN 030 

Restricted Elective 
Choose between: HUCO 410; JOUR 206; THFD 081; THTA 206; THTA 096 

PSYC 050 or SOCI 020 
Choose between PSYC 050: Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) (3crs) and SOCI 020: Introduction to Social Psychology (3crs). 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
SOCI 020 
Introduction to Social Psychology 
3 

Restricted Elec. or Honors Course 
Choose between: HUCO 410; JOUR 206; THFD 081; THTA 206; THTA 096 

THAT 089 OR PHIL 055 OR THFD 081 
Choose between THAT 089 OR PHIL 055 OR THFD 081 


Theatre Technology (B.F.A.) 
The Department of Theatre Arts is committed to the training of knowledgeable theatre artists, theorists, historians, and teachers in the theatre arts. The Department is dedicated to the principle of developing the highest quality of theatre art, and to the serious investigation and perpetuation of the experiences and aesthetics of Black theatre. 
Objectives 
1. 
To train and educate theatre artist-scholars by providing students with a broad-based foundation of theatre process and practice. 

2. 
To provide students with diverse theatre experiences and to investigate and perpetuate the aesthetics of African-American theatre. 

3. 
To provide students with a knowledge of and appreciation for related Fine and Performing Arts disciplines and how they are integrated into the practice of theatre. 

4. 
To provide students with the basic techniques necessary for performance in theatre, film and television. The curriculum for each area of concentration is administered by an Area Coordinator who is appointed by the Chairman of the Department. Students enrolled in a Theatre Arts program shall be advised by the appropriate Area Coordinator. All Theatre Arts students must officially declare an area of concentration and successfully complete an audition and/or interview in that area. 


*One Theatre Practicum class must be taken EVERY semester the student is enrolled (except the semesters that the classes in Technical Production and Drama Internship are being taken). 
FRSM 001 REQUIRED FOR NEW ENTRANTS ONLY, HOWEVER, ALL OTHERS MUST SATISFY THIS CREDIT HOUR REQUIREMENT WITH AN ELECTIVE. 
^All three courses: BASIC STAGE LIGHTING, COSTUME FOR THE STAGE, and BASIC STAGECRAFT are required, but they can be taken in any order. 
NOTE: Students are responsible for the total number of hours. Theatre Technology students are required to present their portfolios for faculty review EACH semester. 
***Those students participating in the Honors program must take THFD-186 (1 credit) Honors Directed Studies in their Junior year and THFD-187 (3 credits) Honors Thesis in their Senior year. 
~It is recommended that the course: Drama Internship in Technical Theatre be taken during the summer prior to the Junior or Senior year. 
SUGGESTED ELECTIVES: An additional College Algebra course, Drawing I, Intro to Photography, Interior Design, Fashion Design, Computers in the Arts, Fundraising for the Arts, an additional Social Science, additional Foreign Language, and an Interdisciplinary Course. 
Type: B.F.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.F.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THTT 058 
Tech Production I 
3 
THDN 300 
Dance for Non-Majors 
2 
THFD 080 
Play Analysis 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
THTT 052 or THTT 051 or THTT 053 
3 
THTT 059 
Tech Production II 
3 
THFD 081 
Play Reading 
3 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THTT 001 
Theatre Practicum I: Rehearsal and Performance 
1 
 
THTT 052 or THTT 051 or THTT 053 
3 
THFD 180 
Theatre History I 
3 
THAC 020 
Introduction to Acting: For Non-Majors 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
 
Foreign Language I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THTT 002, 003, 004, 005, 006, 007 
Theatre Practicum II-VII 
6 
 
THTT 052 or THTT 051 or THTT 053 
3 
THTT 057 
Stage Make-up/Lab 
3 
THFD 181 
Theatre History II 
3 
THAC 030 
Beginning Directing 
3 
 
Foreign Language II 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
21 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THTT 154 
Design I 
3 
THFD 040 
Playwriting I 
3 
THTT 051 
Basic Stage Lighting 
3 
 
General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (6) 
6 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THTT 155 
Design II 
3 
 
Humanities Elective (Options: See Elective Group List Divisional Studies A - Humanities) 
3 
 
PSYC 050 or SOCI 020 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (6) 
6 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057 and 059) 
3 
RTVF 231 
Introduction to Media Production 
3 
 
THTT 150 or THTT 151 or THTT 152 or THTT 153 
3 
 
General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (6) 
6 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
THTT 159 
Seminar in Technical Theatre 
3 
THTT 209 
Drama Internship 
3 
 
Theatre Electives (6 Credits) 
6 
 
General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (6) 
6 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
 
Total credits: 
133 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

THTT 052 or THTT 051 or THTT 053 

Foreign Language I 

Foreign Language II 

General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (6) 

Humanities Elective (Options: See Elective Group List Divisional Studies A - Humanities) 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 

PSYC 050 or SOCI 020 
Choose between PSYC 050: Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) (3crs) and SOCI 020: Introduction to Social Psychology (3crs). 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
SOCI 020 
Introduction to Social Psychology 
3 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057 and 059) 
PHIL 051 
Principles of Reasoning 
3 
PHIL 053 
Introduction to Philosophy of Science 
3 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 
PHIL 057 
Introduction to Ethics 
3 
PHIL 059 
Knowledge and Value 
3 

THTT 150 or THTT 151 or THTT 152 or THTT 153 
THTT 150 
Sound for the Theatre 
3 
THTT 151 
Intermediate Stage Lighting 
3 
THTT 152 
Intermediate Stagecraft 
3 
THTT 153 
Intermediate Costume for the Theatre 
3 

Theatre Electives (6 Credits) 
Courses under subject codes THEA, THTT, THDN, & THMT. 


World Languages 
Spanish 
Spanish (B.A.) 
Students in the undergraduate degree program for Spanish will study the Spanish language, literature, poetry, film, music, business, and cultures. The Spanish curriculum delivers a high level of proficiency in developing speaking, listening, reading, writing, and cultural competency skills. The degree program prepares students to succeed in a variety of careers that include education, business, health sciences, and communication. 
Type: B.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
***Spanish Elective (Courses under subject code SPAN) 
****Minor Course (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Mathematics Elective - MATH 005, 006, or 007 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SPAN 040 
Intensive Grammar Review 
3 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Mathematics Elec (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Mathematics Elective - MATH 005, 006, or 007 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SPAN 052 
Reading and Writing Workshop 
3 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Mathematics Elec (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Writing Course - Courses under subject code ENGL above 003. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SPAN 050 
Oral Expression I 
3 
 
Writing Course 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SPAN 060 
Textual Analysis 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SPAN 080 
Survey of Spanish Literature I 
3 
SPAN 083 
Survey of Latin American Literature and civilization I 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SPAN 077 
Advanced Composition 
3 
SPAN 084 
Survey of Latin American Literature and civilization II 
3 
SPAN 081 
Survey of Spanish Civilization and Literature II 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Spanish Elective - Courses under subject code SPAN 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SPAN 085 
Survey of AFRO Hispanic Literature 
3 
 
Spanish Elective 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Spanish Elective 
3 
CLAS 170 
Senior Seminar 
1 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Mathematics Elec (Options: Courses under code MATH) 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

ENGW 103/105 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Writing Course 

Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies C: Social Sciences (Open to Sophomores) 
AFRO 131 
Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
3 
AFRO 133 
Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
3 
AFRO 191 
Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
ANTH 120 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
3 
CLAS 110 
Blacks in Antiquity 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 199 
Introduction to Urban Economics 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
HIST 030 
Introduction to African History I 
3 
HIST 031 
Introduction to African History II 
3 
HIST 040 
Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
3 
HIST 041 
Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
3 
HIST 150 
Europe to 1815 
3 
HIST 051 
Introduction to European History II 
3 
POLS 003 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
3 
POLS 005 
Introduction to African Politics 
3 
POLS 011 
State and Local Government 
3 
POLS 143 
Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
3 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

Spanish Elective 


Anthropology 
Classics 
Comprehensive Sciences 
Health, Human Perform. & Leisure Studies 
Human Performance (B.S.) 
The Human performance degree program offers a concentration in Sports Medicine that affords students practical and clinical experience grounded in theory and science. The undergraduate degree program provides a strong curriculum which can serve as a gateway to professional schools in medicine, dentistry, and physical therapy. 
Type: B.S. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Math Elective - Options: Math 006/007 or 009 / 010; statistics preferred. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
 
Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (3) 
3 
HHPL 103 
Human Physiology 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Math Elective - Options: Math 006/007 or 009 / 010; statistics preferred. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
 
Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (4) 
4 
HHPL 140 
Human Growth and Development 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 104 
Kinesiology 
3 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 102 
Human Anatomy (Majors only) 
3 
HHPL 108 
Human Anatomy Laboratory 
1 
HHPL 107 
Exercise Physiology I 
3 
HHPL 723 
Introduction to Research and Statistics 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 111 
Motor Learning and Skill Performance 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
HHPL 118 
Athletic Training I 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 103 
Human Physiology 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
HHPL 159/160/175 
1 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
HHPL 112 
First Aid &CPR (Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
AHCC 003 
Medical Terminology 
2 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (4) 
4 
 
Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057 and 059) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (3) 

Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (4) 

ENGW 103/105 

Divisional Studies C - Social Sciences Elective* open to Sophomores (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies C: Social Sciences (Open to Sophomores) 
AFRO 131 
Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
3 
AFRO 133 
Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
3 
AFRO 191 
Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
ANTH 120 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
3 
CLAS 110 
Blacks in Antiquity 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 199 
Introduction to Urban Economics 
3 
HIST 003 
Introduction to History 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
HIST 030 
Introduction to African History I 
3 
HIST 031 
Introduction to African History II 
3 
HIST 040 
Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
3 
HIST 041 
Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
3 
HIST 150 
Europe to 1815 
3 
HIST 051 
Introduction to European History II 
3 
POLS 003 
Introduction to Comparative Politics 
3 
POLS 005 
Introduction to African Politics 
3 
POLS 011 
State and Local Government 
3 
POLS 143 
Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
3 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor 

HHPL 159/160/175 
Choose from HHPL 159, 160, 175 

Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (4) 
Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor 

Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057 and 059) 
PHIL 051 
Principles of Reasoning 
3 
PHIL 053 
Introduction to Philosophy of Science 
3 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 
PHIL 057 
Introduction to Ethics 
3 
PHIL 059 
Knowledge and Value 
3 


Leisure Studies (B.S.) 
The Leisure Studies degree program offers a concentration is Sports Management. Students in the undergraduate degree program for Leisure Studies will study the topics related to planning, organizing, directing, controlling, budgeting, leading, and evaluating with the context of an organization or department who primary product or service is related to sport and or physical activity. The program will prepare graduates for entry into school and college sport programs, or sport related organizations. 
Type: B.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
***Minor Course (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
****Major Elective (Courses under subject code HHPL) 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
HHPL 141 
Intro to Sports Management 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 144 
Sports Law 
3 
HHPL 163 
Foundation of Health Promotion 
3 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 145 
Sports Marketing 
3 
HHPL 147 
Sports and the Media 
1 
HHPL 148 
Sports Governance 
3 
HHPL 149 
Facilities and Event Management 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 150 
Management and Leadership in Sports 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
 
Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
HHPL 221 
Budget & Finance in Sport 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 123 
Res & Stat-Sprt Med Pre-Med 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
HHPL 159/160/175 
1 
 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 717 
Role of Sport in Society 
3 
HHPL 746 
Ethics/Social Issues of Sport 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 151 
Sports Management Internship 
6 
 
Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057 and 059) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
123 
Category Descriptions 
Divisional Studies A* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies A 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement. 
CLAS 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
CLAS 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
ENGL 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
ENGL 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
SPAN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
SPAN 100 
Hispanic Literature in English 
3 
SPAN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
GERM 014 
Introduction to Humanities I, 
3 
GERM 015 
Introduction to Humanities II, 
3 
FREN 014 
Introduction to Humanities I 
3 
FREN 015 
Introduction to Humanities II 
3 
CLAS 016 
Ideas in Antiquity 
3 
CLAS 101 
Greek Literature in Translation 
3 
CLAS 102 
Roman Literature in English 
3 
CLAS 103 
Classical Art 
3 
CLAS 108 
Greek Drama in English 
3 
CLAS 109 
Classical Mythology 
3 
CLAS 111 
Satire and Comedy 
3 
CLAS 113 
Women in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 114 
Love in Antiquity 
3 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
ENGL 180 
Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
3 
ENGL 056 
Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
3 
HUMA 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
SPAN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 100 
Individual and Society 
3 
GERM 101 
Literature of Love 
3 
GERM 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
GERM 109 
Northern Myths and Legends 
3 
GERM 111 
Classic Films in English 
3 
RUSS 100 
Great Short Stories 
3 
RUSS 101 
Literature of Revolution 
3 
RUSS 103 
Love and Hate 
3 
RUSS 109 
Slavic Mythology 
3 
FREN 100 
Francophone Literature in English 
3 
FREN 106 
African Cinema 
3 
FREN 107 
Women in Literature 
3 
MUSC 100 
Introduction to Music 
3 
ARTH 161 
Art Appreciation 
3 
THFD 010 
Introduction to Theatre 
3 

Divisional Studies B - Social Sciences Elective* open to Freshmen (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies B: Social Sciences (Open to Freshmen) 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
CLAS 104 
Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
3 
CLAS 105 
Roman Civilization 
3 
CLAS 112 
Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
3 
CLAS 115 
Slavery in the Ancient World 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
HIST 001 
Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
HIST 102 
Economic Geography 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
GERM 145 
German Culture 
3 
GERM 146 
German Culture 
3 
RUSS 145 
Russian Culture 
3 
RUSS 150 
The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
3 
AFST 106 
Social Media and the African World 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 

ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

ENGW 103/105 

Divisional Studies D - Natural Sciences Elective* (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
Divisional Studies D: Natural Sciences 
SPECIAL NOTE: No more than 6 hours in a single department of the College of Arts and Sciences or in any other school or college can be counted to satisfy the divisional studies requirement 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 002 
Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 003 
Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PHYS 010, 011 
General Astronomy I, II 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Minor Course (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

HHPL 159/160/175 
Choose from HHPL 159, 160, 175 

Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057 and 059) 
PHIL 051 
Principles of Reasoning 
3 
PHIL 053 
Introduction to Philosophy of Science 
3 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 
PHIL 057 
Introduction to Ethics 
3 
PHIL 059 
Knowledge and Value 
3 

Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 


Honors 
Humanities 
College of Nursing & Allied Health Sciences 
College of Nursing & Allied Health Sciences 
Division of Allied Health Sciences 
Clinical Laboratory Sciences 
Clinical Laboratory Sciences (B.S.) 
The program at Howard University provides course study in the areas of medical technology, biochemistry, hematology, clinical decision making, and clinical laboratory management. A degree in Clinical Laboratory Science prepares graduates for employment opportunities in clinical, veterinary, and forensic laboratories; biotechnology and pharmaceutical industries; management, marketing, and biomedical sales. 
IMPORTANT: *Required for students entering the program fall semester 2008 or after 
**CHEM 180,181,182, and 183 may be substituted for General Chemistry Lecture & Labs only with CLS advisors’ approval. 
***CLLS 709 is a writing intensive course and meets the Division’s 3rd writing requirement. 
Third Year: JUNIOR - UPPER DIVISION (CLS Program Courses)  
NOTES: Students MUST submit a CLS Upper Division Application for entry into the Upper Division  
**** 2.5 - Grade Point Average, 2.5 Math and Science GPA for Upper Division admission consideration 
Type: B.S. 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGW 102 
Expository Writing & Literacy Studies 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
AHCC 110 
General Orientation 
2 
CLLS 101 
Introduction to Clinical Laboratory Science 
2 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGW 103 
Persuasive Writing & Research 
3 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 
 
Behavioral Science Elective 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 005 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Choose between BIOL 200 or BIOL 310 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
BIOL 200/310 
4 
CHEM 004 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 006 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*General Elective (Courses level 000 to 299) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 103 
Human Physiology 
3 
CLLS 300 
Basic Clinical Lab Techniques 
2 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
CHEM 141 
Organic Chemistry 
3 
AHCC 003 
Medical Terminology 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CLLS 307 
Clinical Immunology I 
4 
CLLS 303 
Clinical Hematology I 
4 
CLLS 308 
Clinical Diagnostic Microbiology I 
5 
CLLS 309 
Clinical Biochem & Instr. 
4 
CLLS 415 
Clinical Urinalysis and Body Fluids 
3 
CLLS 321 
Junior Recitation 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
20 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CLLS 416 
Clinical Diagnostic Microbiology II 
5 
CLLS 409 
Immunohematology 
4 
CLLS 403 
Clinical Hematology II 
4 
CLLS 310 
Clinical Chemistry II 
4 
CLLS 321 
Junior Recitation 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CLLS 400 
Molecular Diagnostics 
2 
CLLS 720 
Research - WRTG 
3 
CLLS 423 
Senior Recitation 
0 
CLLS 408 
Chemistry Practicum 
4 
CLLS 411 
Immunohematology Practicum 
4 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CLLS 418 
Clinical Laboratory Management Decision Making 
2 
CLLS 423 
Senior Recitation 
0 
CLLS 404 
Hematology/Urinalysis Practicum 
4 
CLLS 406 
Microbiology Practicum 
5 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
11 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Behavioral Science Elective 

BIOL 200/310 
Genetics Lec/Lab - BIOL 200 
Cell Biology - BIOL 310 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 


Health Management Sciences Program 
Health Sciences (B.S.) 
The Bachelor of Sciences in Health Science curriculum is designed to prepare students to perform executive management tasks and the goals of achieving lifelong career in a wide variety of organizations that deliver health care services, as well as pursue graduate education nationally and internationally. 
Type: B.S. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
ENGL 002 
Freshman Composition 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
AHCC 110 
General Orientation 
2 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 003 
Freshman Composition 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
PSYC 116 
Abnormal Psychology 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Elective (Health Science) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*HHPL 159 or HHPL 160, 161, 162, 163. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
 
Humanities Elective 
3 
ENGL 009 
Technical Writing, Pre-Professional 
3 
AHCC 003 
Medical Terminology 
2 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
HHPL 159 
Health Science 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 
HHPL 140 
Human Growth and Development 
3 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
HHPL 112 
First Aid &CPR (Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 005 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
HLMN 102 
Health Systems Management I 
3 
HHPL 111 
Motor Learning and Skill Performance 
3 
PHIL 051 
Principles of Reasoning 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 004 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 006 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
HLMN 404 
Health Policy 
3 
MDAN 168 
Basic Gross Anatomy 
4 
HESC 220 
Intro to Physical Therapy 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MPHY 101 
General Physiology 
4 
HESC 405 
Fund of Scientific Inquiry 
2 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
HHPL 107 
Exercise Physiology I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 104 
Kinesiology 
3 
HHPL 130 
Exercise Physiology II - Neuromuscular Aspects 
3 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
NUTR 161 
Nutrition for Health Majors 
3 
AHCC 375 
Geriatrics for Allied Health Professions 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Elective (Health Science) 
Courses with subject code HESC. 

Humanities Elective 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 


Health Sciences (B.S.) - Health Management Concentration 
The Bachelor of Sciences in Health Science curriculum is designed to prepare students to perform executive management tasks and the goals of achieving lifelong career in a wide variety of organizations that deliver health care services, as well as pursue graduate education nationally and internationally. 
Type: B.S. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Math 006/007 - College Algebra I (3crs) or Precalculus (4crs) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 002 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
MATH 006/007 
3 
- 
4 
AHCC 110 
General Orientation 
2 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
NUTR 161 
Nutrition for Health Majors 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Math 010/156 - College Algebra II (4crs) or Calculus I (4crs) 
**AFRO 005 or AFRO 700 Equivalent Studies (TBD) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGL 003 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
MATH 010/156 
4 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
HLMN 201 
Community Health Organizations 
3 
INFO 204 
Management Information Systems 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ENGL 009 
Technical Writing, Pre-Professional 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*HHPL 140 or HUDV 150 - Human Grwth & Dev (3crs) or Pos Aging in Adult Dev. (3crs) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
PHIL 051 
Principles of Reasoning 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
 
HHPL 140 or HUDV 150 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
AHCC 003 
Medical Terminology 
2 
ACCT 201 
Accounting Principles I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HLMN 102 
Health Systems Management I 
3 
HLMN 306 
Principles of Epidemiology 
3 
HLMN 410 
Health Economics 
3 
HLMN 315 
Health Informatics 
3 
SOCI 110 
Elementary Statistics 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
HLMN 304 
Global Leadership Inter. 
3 
MGMT 301 
Management & OB 
3 
HLMN 305 
Health Care Finance 
3 
AHCC 301 
Ethics for Health Profession 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HLMN 400 
Health Operations Research 
3 
HLMN 402 
Health Management Internship 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
MKTG 301 
Principles of Marketing 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HLMN 408 
Health Management Capstone Seminar 
3 
MGMT 303 
Human Resources Management 
3 
HLMN 404 
Health Policy 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
AHCC 375 
Geriatrics for Allied Health Professions 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
MATH 006/007 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

MATH 010/156 

HHPL 140 or HUDV 150 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 


Nutritional Sciences 
Nutritional Sciences - Pre-Dental/Pre- Medicine Emphasis (B.S.) 
The program focuses on preparing students for entry into medical and dental schools. With increasing recognition of the association between diet and disease and the importance of diet in health promotion, nutritionists and dietitians are needed to participate in research, to educate the public on ways to promote health through diet, and to educate individuals suffering from chronic diseases on ways to incorporate dietary modifications into their lifestyles. 
IMPORTANT: Statistics course must be selected from the following: SOCI 110, MATH 009, or PSYC 063. 
D/AHS Elective must be selected from Allied Health Core. 
Type: B.S. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGW)  
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Physical Education (Courses under subject code HHPL) 
**MATH 006/007: Choose between MATH 006 - College Algebra I (3crs) or MATH 007 - Precalculus (4crs). 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
AHCC 110 
General Orientation 
2 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
MATH 006/007 
3 
- 
4 
NUTR 161 
Nutrition for Health Majors 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education (Active) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*MATH 010/156: Choose between MATH 010 - College Algebra II (4crs) or MATH 156 - Calculus I (4crs). 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 005 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
MATH 010/156 
4 
NUTR 320 
Nutrition during the Life Cycle 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
CHEM 004 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 006 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
NAHS 171 
Human Anatomy and Physiology I 
4 
NUTR 183 
Community Nutrition 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
AHCC 003 
Medical Terminology 
2 
BIOL 102 
General Biology II 
4 
CHEM 141 
Organic Chemistry 
3 
NAHS 172 
Human Anatomy and Physiology II 
4 
NUTR 006 
Introduction to Foods 
4 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
AHCC 301 
Ethics for Health Profession 
2 
CHEM 142 
Organic Chemistry 
3 
CHEM 145 
Organic Chemistry Laboratory 
3 
NUTR 323 
Evaluation of Nutritional Status 
3 
 
Statistics Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 151 
Biochemistry I 
3 
NUTR 175 
Advanced Nutrition 
3 
NUTR 410 
Medical Nutrition Therapy I 
3 
PHYS 001 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
BIOL 220 
General Microbiology 
4 
NUTR 413 
Medical Nutrition Therapy II 
3 
NUTR 416 
Research Methods in Nutrition 
3 
PHYS 002 
General Physics I (Laboratory) 
5 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
NUTR 169 
Field Experience in Human Nutrition and Food 
6 
NUTR 189 
Food Chemistry and Analysis 
4 
NUTR 425 
Issues in Dietetics end Nutrition 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
121 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

MATH 006/007 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Physical Education (Active) 

MATH 010/156 

Statistics Elective 
May take MATH 009, SOCI 110, or PSYC 003. 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
SOCI 110 
Elementary Statistics 
3 
PSYC 063 
Research methods and Statistics, 
4 


Nutritional Sciences – Dietetics (B.S.) 
The Department of Nutritional Sciences offers the Bachelor of Science Degree in Nutritional Sciences. The curriculum allows students to complete the general education and basic science courses in the first two years. During the last two years, students, along with their advisors, select courses, which prepare them to become dietitians or nutritionist. The Bachelor of Science is Degree is offered with emphases in Community Nutrition, Human Nutrition and Food, and the fully accredited Coordinated Undergraduate Program in Dietetics. 
IMPORTANT: Statistics course must be selected from the following: SOCI 110, MATH 009, or PSYC 063. 
Type: B.S. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGW)  
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*MATH 006/007: Choose between MATH 006 - College Algebra I (3crs) or MATH 007 - Precalculus (4crs). 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
AHCC 110 
General Orientation 
2 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
MATH 006/007 
3 
- 
4 
NUTR 161 
Nutrition for Health Majors 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education (Active) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*MATH 010/156: Choose between MATH 010 - College Algebra II (4crs) or MATH 156 - Calculus I (4crs). 
**Physical Education (Courses under subject code HHPL under level 100) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 005 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
MATH 010/156 
4 
NUTR 320 
Nutrition during the Life Cycle 
3 
AHCC 003 
Medical Terminology 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
CHEM 004 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 006 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
NAHS 171 
Human Anatomy and Physiology I 
4 
EDUC 212 
Educational Psychology: Learning &African American Learners 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
BIOL 220 
General Microbiology 
4 
CHEM 141 
Organic Chemistry 
3 
NAHS 172 
Human Anatomy and Physiology II 
4 
NUTR 006 
Introduction to Foods 
4 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Junior Year First Semester 
 
 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
NUTR 130 
Nutritional Biochemistry 
3 
NUTR 183 
Community Nutrition 
3 
ACCT 201 
Accounting Principles I 
3 
NUTR 323 
Evaluation of Nutritional Status 
3 
 
Statistics Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
BCOM 320 
Business Communications 
3 
NUTR 175 
Advanced Nutrition 
3 
ACCT 202 
Accounting Principles II 
3 
INFO 335 
Production and Operations Management 
3 
AHCC 301 
Ethics for Health Profession 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INFO 204 
Management Information Systems 
3 
NUTR 417 
Nutr in Hlth & Dis 
3 
NUTR 416 
Research Methods in Nutrition 
3 
MGMT 331 
Decision-Making 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
NUTR 327 
Hlth Plan & Prom 
3 
NUTR 189 
Food Chemistry and Analysis 
4 
NUTR 419 
Field Placement 
1 
MGMT 303 
Human Resources Management 
3 
INFO 311 
Quantitative Business Analysis 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
 
Total credits: 
122 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

MATH 006/007 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Physical Education (Active) 

MATH 010/156 

Statistics Elective 
May take MATH 009, SOCI 110, or PSYC 003. 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
SOCI 110 
Elementary Statistics 
3 
PSYC 063 
Research methods and Statistics, 
4 


Nutritional Sciences – Health Education (B.S.) 
The Department of Nutritional Sciences offers the Bachelor of Science Degree in Nutritional Sciences. The curriculum allows students to complete the general education and basic science courses in the first two years. During the last two years, students, along with their advisors, select courses, which prepare them to become dietitians or nutritionist. The Bachelor of Science is Degree is offered with emphases in Community Nutrition, Human Nutrition and Food, and the fully accredited Coordinated Undergraduate Program in Dietetics. 
IMPORTANT: Statistics course must be selected from the following: SOCI 110, MATH 009, or PSYC 063. 
Type: B.S. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGW)  
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*MATH 006/007: Choose between MATH 006 - College Algebra I (3crs) or MATH 007 - Precalculus (4crs). 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
AHCC 110 
General Orientation 
2 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
MATH 006/007 
3 
- 
4 
NUTR 161 
Nutrition for Health Majors 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education (Active) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*MATH 010/156: Choose between MATH 010 - College Algebra II (4crs) or MATH 156 - Calculus I (4crs). 
**Physical Education (Courses under subject code HHPL under level 100) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 005 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
MATH 010/156 
4 
NUTR 320 
Nutrition during the Life Cycle 
3 
AHCC 003 
Medical Terminology 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
CHEM 004 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 006 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
NAHS 171 
Human Anatomy and Physiology I 
4 
NUTR 200 
Into Hlth Educ Nutr 
2 
EDUC 212 
Educational Psychology: Learning &African American Learners 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
BIOL 220 
General Microbiology 
4 
CHEM 141 
Organic Chemistry 
3 
NAHS 172 
Human Anatomy and Physiology II 
4 
NUTR 006 
Introduction to Foods 
4 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Junior Year First Semester 
 
 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
NUTR 130 
Nutritional Biochemistry 
3 
NUTR 183 
Community Nutrition 
3 
NUTR 418 
Soc Deter Hlth Nutr 
3 
NUTR 323 
Evaluation of Nutritional Status 
3 
HLMN 201 
Community Health Organizations 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
NUTR 175 
Advanced Nutrition 
3 
NUTR 326 
Nutrition Policy 
3 
NUTR 327 
Hlth Plan & Prom 
3 
AHCC 301 
Ethics for Health Profession 
2 
 
Statistics Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
NUTR 310 
Introduction to Dietetics 
3 
NUTR 417 
Nutr in Hlth & Dis 
3 
NUTR 416 
Research Methods in Nutrition 
3 
HLMN 404 
Health Policy 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
NUTR 425 
Issues in Dietetics end Nutrition 
2 
NUTR 189 
Food Chemistry and Analysis 
4 
NUTR 419 
Field Placement 
1 
NUTR 421 
Global Hlth Nutr 
3 
HLMN 306 
Principles of Epidemiology 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
 
Total credits: 
123 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

MATH 006/007 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Physical Education (Active) 

MATH 010/156 

Statistics Elective 
May take MATH 009, SOCI 110, or PSYC 003. 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
SOCI 110 
Elementary Statistics 
3 
PSYC 063 
Research methods and Statistics, 
4 


Nutritional Sciences – Management (B.S.) 
The Department of Nutritional Sciences offers the Bachelor of Science Degree in Nutritional Sciences. The curriculum allows students to complete the general education and basic science courses in the first two years. During the last two years, students, along with their advisors, select courses, which prepare them to become dietitians or nutritionist. The Bachelor of Science is Degree is offered with emphases in Community Nutrition, Human Nutrition and Food, and the fully accredited Coordinated Undergraduate Program in Dietetics. 
IMPORTANT: Statistics course must be selected from the following: SOCI 110, MATH 009, or PSYC 063. 
Type: B.S. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGW)  
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*MATH 006/007: Choose between MATH 006 - College Algebra I (3crs) or MATH 007 - Precalculus (4crs). 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
AHCC 110 
General Orientation 
2 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
MATH 006/007 
3 
- 
4 
NUTR 161 
Nutrition for Health Majors 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education (Active) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*MATH 010/156: Choose between MATH 010 - College Algebra II (4crs) or MATH 156 - Calculus I (4crs). 
**Physical Education (Courses under subject code HHPL under level 100) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 005 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
MATH 010/156 
4 
NUTR 320 
Nutrition during the Life Cycle 
3 
AHCC 003 
Medical Terminology 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
CHEM 004 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 006 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
NAHS 171 
Human Anatomy and Physiology I 
4 
EDUC 212 
Educational Psychology: Learning &African American Learners 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
BIOL 220 
General Microbiology 
4 
CHEM 141 
Organic Chemistry 
3 
NAHS 172 
Human Anatomy and Physiology II 
4 
NUTR 006 
Introduction to Foods 
4 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Junior Year First Semester 
 
 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
NUTR 130 
Nutritional Biochemistry 
3 
NUTR 183 
Community Nutrition 
3 
ACCT 201 
Accounting Principles I 
3 
NUTR 323 
Evaluation of Nutritional Status 
3 
 
Statistics Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
BCOM 320 
Business Communications 
3 
NUTR 175 
Advanced Nutrition 
3 
ACCT 202 
Accounting Principles II 
3 
INFO 335 
Production and Operations Management 
3 
AHCC 301 
Ethics for Health Profession 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INFO 204 
Management Information Systems 
3 
NUTR 417 
Nutr in Hlth & Dis 
3 
NUTR 416 
Research Methods in Nutrition 
3 
MGMT 331 
Decision-Making 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
NUTR 327 
Hlth Plan & Prom 
3 
NUTR 189 
Food Chemistry and Analysis 
4 
NUTR 419 
Field Placement 
1 
MGMT 303 
Human Resources Management 
3 
INFO 311 
Quantitative Business Analysis 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
 
Total credits: 
122 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

MATH 006/007 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Physical Education (Active) 

MATH 010/156 

Statistics Elective 
May take MATH 009, SOCI 110, or PSYC 003. 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
SOCI 110 
Elementary Statistics 
3 
PSYC 063 
Research methods and Statistics, 
4 


Nursing 
Nursing (B.S.N.) 
The Bachelor of Science program in Nursing offers a balanced curriculum including courses in the liberal arts, the sciences, the humanities, and nursing. Many of the nursing courses are concentrated in the junior and senior years and involve classroom and clinical learning experiences in hospitals, long-term care facilities, homeless shelters, patients' homes and other community-based settings. Students in the Bachelor’s degree program develop competencies in the care of adults, children, child-bearing families and the elderly. A theoretical base for nursing practice is laid early in the program and students grow in their ability to apply theory in developing systems of care for patients. 
Type: B.S.N. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGW)  
Type: 
B.S.N. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FRSM 001 
Freshman Seminar 
1 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Literature - Courses under subject codes CLAS or ENGL 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 005 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Literature 
3 
 
African-American Studies (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Fine Arts (Art, Dance, Music, Theatre) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
NAHS 171 
Human Anatomy and Physiology I 
4 
MDMI 103 
Microbiology w/Lab 
4 
SOCI 180 
The Family 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Fine Arts Elective (2) 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
NUTR 161 
Nutrition for Health Majors 
3 
SOCI 110 
Elementary Statistics 
3 
NAHS 172 
Human Anatomy and Physiology II 
4 
HHPL 140 
Human Growth and Development 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
NURS 304 
Pathophysiology 
3 
NURS 307 
Health Assessment Across the Lifespan 
3 
NURS 320 
Fundamentals of Nursing Practice 
5 
NURS 321 
Introduction to Professional Nursing Practice 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
NURS 306 
Introduction to Pharmacology 
3 
NURS 326 
Nursing of the Childbearing Family 
5 
NURS 325 
Adult Health Nursing 
7 
AHCC 301 
Ethics for Health Profession 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Senior Year Summer Session 
Students have the option to take an elective during the Summer preceding Senior year or Fall/Spring semester of Senior year. A student must successfully complete all prerequisite courses from an accredited college/university prior to enrolling in the BSN Upper Division Plan of Study. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
NURS 400 
Elective Clinical Nursing 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
3 
Senior Year First Semester 
*NURS Elective - If NURS 400 is not taken. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
NURS 403 
Nursing Research 
2 
 
NURS - Elective 
3 
NURS 431 
Health Policy &Economics 
2 
NURS 412 
Nursing of Infants and Children 
5 
NURS 421 
Psychiatric Mental Health Nursing 
5 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*NURS Elective - If NURS 400 is not taken. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
NURS 406 
Senior Practicum 
4 
NURS 436 
Community Health Nursing 
3 
NURS 438 
Nursing Leadership 
3 
NURS 440 
Nursing Synthesis 
3 
 
NURS - Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

Literature 

African-American Studies (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 

Fine Arts Elective (2) 

NURS - Elective 
Only take if NURS 400 is not taken. 


Physician Assistant (PA) Program 
Radiation Therapy Program 
Radiation Therapy (B.S.) 
Howard University offers an accredited educational program in the field of radiation therapy. The program integrates academic theory and clinical study. The primary responsibilities of radiation therapists are to provide service delivery for patients who have been diagnosed with cancer. Career opportunities for radiation therapists include positions as staff radiation therapists, clinical instructors, managers, administrators, sales/private industry, researchers, and educators. 
Type: B.S. 
 
 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGW 102 
Expository Writing & Literacy Studies 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
BIOL 101 
General Biology 
4 
AHCC 110 
General Orientation 
2 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
African-American Cluster (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Choose between MATH 007 and MATH 010 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGW 103 
Persuasive Writing & Research 
3 
 
MATH 007/010 
4 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
 
PHIL 051 or PHIL 055 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
RASC 211 
Radiation Therapy Orientation 
2 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
NUTR 161 
Nutrition for Health Majors 
3 
AHCC 003 
Medical Terminology 
2 
NAHS 171 
Human Anatomy and Physiology I 
4 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
SOCI 110 
Elementary Statistics 
3 
AHCC 301 
Ethics for Health Profession 
2 
PHYS 007 
Physics for Allied Health Students 
5 
NAHS 172 
Human Anatomy and Physiology II 
4 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
RASC 310 
Clinical Radiotherapy I 
2 
RASC 311 
Principles and Practice of Radiation Therapy 
3 
RASC 312 
Environment and Radiation Protection 
2 
RASC 313 
Radiation Therapy Physics I 
3 
RASC 314 
Cross Sectional Anatomy 
2 
RASC 315 
Introduction to Oncology 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
RASC 320 
Clinical Radiation Therapy II 
2 
RASC 323 
Imaging and Radiation Therapy 
2 
RASC 324 
Patient Care and Management 
2 
RASC 325 
Radiation Oncology I 
3 
RASC 326 
Radiation Therapy Physics II 
3 
RASC 327 
Pathophysiology 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year - Summer Sessions 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
RASC 330 
Clinical Radiation Therapy III 
3 
RASC 335 
Clinical Radiotherapy IV 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
6 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
RASC 410 
Clinical Radiotherapy V 
2 
RASC 412 
Treatment Planning I 
2 
RASC 415 
Radiation Oncology II 
3 
RASC 414 
Problem Solving 
1 
HLMN 102 
Health Systems Management I 
3 
AHCC 414 
Radiation Therapy Scientific Inquiry 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
RASC 420 
Clinical Radiation Therapy VI 
4 
RASC 422 
Problem Seminar 
2 
RASC 426 
Treatment Planning II 
2 
RASC 427 
Radiation Biology 
2 
RASC 428 
Quality Management 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

African-American Cluster (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 

MATH 007/010 
Choose between MATH 007 and 010 

PHIL 051 or PHIL 055 
Choose between PHIL 051: Principles of Reasoning (3crs) or PHIL 055: Introduction to Philosophy (3crs). 


School of Education 
School of Education 
Department of Human Development and Psychoeducational Studies (HDPES) 
Department of Curriculum and Instruction (C&I) 
Elementary Education 
Elementary Education (B.S.) 
The Bachelor of Science degree in Elementary Education is a four-year program that is aligned with the departments mission to prepare teachers and other professionals for leadership roles in a variety of national and global educational settings. The department specifically champions the needs of black and other underrepresented students in urban communities. The program is focused on asset-focused teaching methodology and interdisciplinary coursework to prepare students to think and reflect critically. 
Type: B.S. 
*Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Science Elective (TBD after consultation with advisor) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGW 104 
Writing, Literacy & Discourse 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Science Elective 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
EDUC 100 
Orientation &Pre-Professional Seminar 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Fine Arts Elective (Courses under AR_ _, MU _ _, or TH_ _) 
**Science Elective (Courses under CHEM, PHYS, BIOC, BIOG, BIOL) 
***Choose between HIST 009 or HIST 010 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ENGW 105 
Reflective Writing and Portfolios 
3 
 
Fine Arts Elective (3) 
3 
 
Science Elective 
3 
HIST 009 
United States History to 1877 
3 
HIST 010 
United States History Since 1877 
3 
EDUC 120 
International Education for Contemporary Societies 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HUDV 114 
Growth and Development in Childhood and Adolescence 
3 
EDUC 212 
Educational Psychology: Learning &African American Learners 
3 
MATH 020 
Fundamental Concepts of Mathematics for Education I 
3 
EDUC 218 
Foundations &Processes of Reading Acquisition 
3 
EDUC 219 
Schooling for Diverse Populations in American Society 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EDUC 220 
Learners with Diverse Cognitive, Behavior, &Language Characteristics 
3 
EDUC 221 
Talent Development Model of Schooling 
3 
EDUC 222 
Engaging Urban Parents, Families &Communities 
3 
EDUC 223 
Instructional Technology for 21st Century 
3 
EDUC 225 
Earth Science and Elementary Science Practices (and Lab) 
3 
MATH 021 
Fundamental Concepts of Mathematics for Education II 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Spanish 001 or other World Lang. I 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EDUC 312 
Introduction to Assessment &Measurement 
3 
EDUC 314 
Principles of Teaching Math &Science in Urban Classrooms I 
4 
EDUC 315 
Principles of Teaching Math & Science in Urban Classrooms II 
4 
EDUC 316 
Strategies for Teaching English Language Learners 
3 
SPAN 001 
Spanish I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*SPAN 002 or other World Lang. II 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EDUC 321 
Literature &Writing in Urban, Elementary Schools 
3 
EDUC 322 
Teaching Language Arts and Social Studies in Urban Elementary Schools 
3 
EDUC 323 
Literacy Assessment &Instructional Frameworks in Urban, Elem Schools 
3 
EDUC 324 
Teaching Social Studies, Arts, Health and PE in Urban Elem Schools 
4 
SPAN 002 
Spanish II 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EDUC 412 
Research Foundations &Methods for Classroom Teachers 
3 
EDUC 450 
Internship and Classroom Management. 
9 
- 
12 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EDUC 420 
Interdisciplinary Research in STEM 
3 
EDUC 480 
International Internship &Special Topics Seminar 
9 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Science Elective 
Courses under subject codes CHEM, PHYS, BIOL, BIOG, and BIOC 

Fine Arts Elective (3) 


Human Development 
Human Development (B.S.) 
The Human Development Undergraduate degree program at Howard University is ecologically oriented and focuses on the study of individuals and families from a multidisciplinary perspective. Students may choose to concentrate on infancy, childhood, adolescence, or adult development. Specializations focus on the developmental process throughout the life-cycle and interpersonal relationships within the context of family and other human / environmental settings. 
IMPORTANT: *A grade of “C” or better must be earned in each of the two required math courses in order to fulfill the math requirement and in order to enroll in each and every school of business junior-level and senior-level course. Only 3 credit hours will be awarded for each required math course. 
Type: B.S. 
*Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HUDV 095 
Human Development, Family, Culture and Society 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
COMP 001 
Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
3 
PSYC 001 
Foundations of Psychological Science (Majors/Minors Only) 
4 
HUDV 001 
Freshman Orientation Seminar in Human Development 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HUDV 113 
Prenatal, Infancy and Early Childhood Development 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
ENGW 003/105 
3 
HUDV 148 
Research in Human Development 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HUDV 114 
Growth and Development in Childhood and Adolescence 
3 
HHPL 102 
Human Anatomy (Majors only) 
3 
HHPL 108 
Human Anatomy Laboratory 
1 
PSYC 003 
Statistics I 
4 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
HUDV 150 
Positive Aging in Adult Development 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HHPL 103 
Human Physiology 
3 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 
PSYC 004 
Statistics II 
4 
 
Foreign Language (Level 2+) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HUDV 119 
Diverse Youth of Color 
3 
HUDV 118 
Children and Adolescents Placed at Risk 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
 
POLS 010/011 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HUDV 141 
Risk and Resiliency in Families and Intimate Relationships. 
3 
HUDV 120 
Interdisciplinary Perspectives in Human Development 
3 
NUTR 160 
Nutrition 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HUDV 169 
Internship in Human Development 
6 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
HUDV 143 
Parentology: Theory, Research, and Support Systems 
3 
HUDV 149 
Youth, Consumer Culture and the Earth 
3 
NURS 419 
Death, Grief and Bereavement 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (2) 
2 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

ENGW 003/105 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English Department. 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Foreign Language (Level 2+) 

POLS 010/011 
Choose between POLS 010 or POLS 011. 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor 

General Electives (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (2) 


College of Engineering and Architecture 
College of Engineering and Architecture 
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering 
Civil Engineering 
Civil Engineering (B.S.) 
The Department of Civil Engineering at Howard University offers a Bachelor of Science degree in Civil Engineering. The study of civil engineering addresses the grand challenges of restoring, protecting, and improving our Nation's infrastructure with a keen eye on sustainable, green design. At Howard University, faculty and students are involved in interdisciplinary research involving collaborations with departments both within Howard and external to Howard and have made distinct inroads in research and education within our field. 
Type: B.S. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EGPP 101 
Introduction to Engineering 
2 
MATH 156 
Calculus I 
4 
ENGL 002 
Freshman Composition 
3 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 005 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CIEG 104 
Civil Engineering Software & Design 
3 
MATH 157 
Calculus II 
4 
ENGL 003 
Freshman Composition 
3 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 023, 024, 025 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students Laboratory 
1 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Basic Science Elective (Courses under CHEM, PHYS, BIOL, BIOG, and BIOC) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Basic Science Elective 
3 
CIEG 202 
Statics 
3 
MATH 158 
Calculus III 
4 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 023, 024, 025 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students Laboratory 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Humanities Elective 
3 
CIEG 302 
Dynamics 
3 
CIEG 351 
Probability and Statistics 
3 
MEEG 209 
Material Science 
3 
MATH 159 
Differential Equations 
4 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CIEG 207 
Introduction to Environmental Engineering 
3 
CIEG 301 
Mechanics of Materials Lecture 
3 
CIEG 303 
Mechanics of Materials Lab 
1 
CIEG 311 
Fluid Mechanics Lecture 
3 
CIEG 313 
Fluid Mechanics Lab 
1 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CIEG 314 
Basic Structural Analysis 
3 
CIEG 354 
Engineering Economics 
3 
CIEG 352 
Water Resources Engineering I, 
3 
CIEG 416 
Transportation Engineering 
3 
CIEG 434 
Soil Mechanics Lecture 
3 
CIEG 438 
Soil Mechanics Lab 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year First Semester 
*CIEG Elective (Courses under CIEG) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CIEG 439 
Senior Design I 
1 
 
CIEG Elective 
3 
 
CIEG Elective 
3 
 
CIEG Elective 
3 
CIEG 464 
Engineering Project Management 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Technical Elective (Courses under code BIOL, CHEM, PHYS, MATH, ECON, CIEG, CHEG, CSCI, SYCS, INFO, ECEE, & MEEG level 000 to 299) 
**CIEG Elective (Courses under CIEG) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CIEG 441 
Senior Design II 
2 
CIEG 462 
Seminar 
1 
 
CIEG Elective 
3 
 
Technical Elective 
3 
 
Technical Elective 
3 
 
African-American Elective (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Basic Science Elective 

Humanities Elective 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Social Science Elective 

CIEG Elective 

Technical Elective 

African-American Elective (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 


Computer Science 
Computer Science 
Computer Science (B.S.) 
The undergraduate degree is in computer science is a stepping stone for students interested in computer science careers or graduate studies in computer science or programming. 
NOTES: *Students should complete one of their divisional requirements within the African American course cluster. Students must make two science lecture and lab subjects chosen from Physics, Biology and Chemistry..One science subject must be taken for two semesters (i.e. CHEM 003 and CHEM 005 and CHEM 004 and CHEM 006). 
Type: B.S. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
***Technical Electives-(Courses under code BIOL, CHEM, PHYS, MATH, ECON, CIEG, CHEG,CSCI, SYCS, INFO,EECE, & MEEG level 000 to 299). Must be chosen with the approval of the student's academic advisor. 
****Non-Technical Electives-(Courses other than those under code BIOL, CHEM, PHYS, MATH, ECON, CIEG, CHEG,CSCI, SYCS, INFO,EECE, & MEEG level 000 to 299) 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Non-Technical Elective (Divisional studies A, B or C) 
**Freshman Composition I (ENGW 002 or ENGW 004). 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CSCI 120 
Explorations in Computer Science 
2 
 
Non-Technical Elective 
3 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Science Lecture A 
4 
 
Science Lab A 
0 
CSCI 100 
Intro to Computer Science 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Freshman Composition II (ENGW 003 or ENGW 005). 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CSCI 135 
Computer Science I 
4 
CSCI 212 
Linux Lab 
1 
MATH 156 
Calculus I 
4 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CSCI 136 
Computer Science II 
3 
CSCI 201 
Computer Organization I 
3 
MATH 157 
Calculus II 
4 
 
Science Lecture B (1) 
4 
 
Science Lab B (1) 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CSCI 354 
Computer Science III 
3 
CSCI 375 
Software Engineering 
3 
CSCI 202 
Computer Organization II 
3 
MATH 181 
Discrete Structures 
3 
 
Science Lecture B (2) 
4 
 
Science Lab B (2) 
0 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CSCI 341 
Theory of Computation 
3 
CSCI 401 
Operating Systems 
3 
CSCI 470 
Fundamentals of Algorithms 
3 
CSCI 449 
Computer Networks 
3 
CSCI 453 
Intro to Cyber Security I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CSCI 350 
Structure of Programming Languages 
3 
 
Technical Elective 
3 
CSCI 432 
Database Systems 
3 
ENGL 009 
Technical Writing, Pre-Professional 
3 
MATH 180 
Introduction to Linear Algebra 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CSCI 491 
Senior Project I 
3 
CSCI 363 
Large Scale Programming 
3 
CSCI 473 
Applied Data Science 
3 
 
Technical Elective 
3 
 
Technical Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Non-Technical Elective (Divisional studies A, B or C) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CSCI 492 
Senior Project II 
3 
 
Technical Elective 
3 
 
Technical Elective 
3 
 
Non-Technical Elective 
3 
 
Non-Technical Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Non-Technical Elective 

Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

Science Lecture A 

Science Lab A 

Science Lecture B (1) 

Science Lab B (1) 

Science Lecture B (2) 

Science Lab B (2) 

Technical Elective 


Electrical Engineering 
Electrical Engineering (B.S.) 
Students seeking a Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering must complete a minimum of 120 credit hours including core courses in Electrical Engineering, Computer Programming, Mathematics, Science, and Liberal Arts, humanities / Social Sciences, and African American Studies. This program is accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET. 
NOTES: EECE 212 & 218 (Fall) followed by EECE 406 & 412 (Spring) can be taken in the Freshman year if the students schedule requires adjustment due to math placement or course scheduling conflicts. 
The two-semester English writing sequence is determined by the placement exam: 
Students placed into ENGW 102 must take ENGW 103 to complete their writing sequence 
Students placed into ENGW 104 must take ENGW 105 to complete their writing sequence 
Preferred Humanities courses are: PHIL-051 (Principles of Reasoning) or PHIL-175 (Symbolic Logic)  
Type: B.S. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
***Engineering Science Elective (Courses under EECE & CIEG) 
****EE/CpE Elective (Options: Courses under code EECE) 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 156 
Calculus I 
4 
EGPP 101 
Introduction to Engineering 
2 
CSCI 135 
Computer Science I 
4 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 005 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Choose ENGW 104 or ENGW 102 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 157 
Calculus II 
4 
EECE 102 
Introduction to Electrical & Computer Engineering 
1 
EECE 260 
Engineering Programming & Application 
3 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 023, 024, 025 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students Laboratory 
1 
ENGW 104 
Writing, Literacy & Discourse 
3 
ENGW 102 
Expository Writing & Literacy Studies 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 158 
Calculus III 
4 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 023, 024, 025 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students Laboratory 
1 
EECE 212 
Fundamentals of Digital Systems 
4 
EECE 218 
Fundamentals of Digital Systems Design Laboratory 
1 
MATH 159 
Differential Equations 
4 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Choose ENGW 105 or ENGW 103. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EECE 160 
Engineering Mathematics 
4 
EECE 203 
Fundamentals of Circuit Theory 
4 
EECE 209 
Fundamentals of Circuit Theory Lab 
1 
ENGW 105 
Reflective Writing and Portfolios 
3 
ENGW 103 
Persuasive Writing & Research 
3 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EECE 305 
Fundamental: Electromagnetics 
4 
EECE 306 
Fundamental: Electromagnetics Lab 
1 
EECE 309 
Fundamentals of Electronics & SS Devices 
4 
EECE 312 
Fund: Elec & SS Devices Lab 
1 
EECE 331 
Probability & Statistics for Eng Appl 
3 
 
Humanities Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EECE 333 
Fundamentals of Signals and Systems 
4 
EECE 325 
Fundamentals of Energy Systems 
4 
EECE 326 
Fundamentals of Energy Systems Lab 
1 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Math/Science Elective Course 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EECE 401 
Senior Design I 
3 
 
EE/CpE Elective 
3 
 
EE/CpE Elective 
3 
 
EE/CpE Elective 
3 
 
EE/CpE Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EECE 404 
Senior Design II 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
 
EE/CpE Elective 
3 
 
EE/CpE Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Social Science Elective 

Humanities Elective 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Math/Science Elective Course 

EE/CpE Elective 


Architecture 
Architecture (B.ARCH.) 
The Department of Architecture offers a program of study leading to the five-year Bachelor of Architecture (B.Arch.) professional degree accredited by the National Architectural Accreditation Board (NAAB). The program places emphasis on student competence in the following pragmatic areas: design, inquiry/research, architectural history and theory, human behavior and environment, technical systems, computer usage and professional practice. Study in these areas provides the student with fundamental design and communication skills through critical thinking, conflict resolution, visual literacy, knowledge of forces that shape and influence societal and human affairs and the impact of new technologies in an ever- changing world test. 
Type: B.ARCH. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
***Liberal Arts or Studies Elective (Divisional Studies A-D courses) 
****Professional Elective (Courses under subject code ARCH) 
Type: 
B.ARCH. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
ARCH 003 
Environment and Architecture 
3 
ARCH 150 
Design Communications I 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
MATH 007 
Precalculus 
4 
ARCH 011 
Elements of Architecture 
3 
ARCH 151 
Design Communication II 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARCH 199 
Design I 
6 
ARCH 301 
Architectural History Survey I 
3 
ARCH 401 
Materials and Methods I 
3 
PHYS 008 
Physics for Architecture Students 
5 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARCH 200 
Design II 
6 
ARCH 302 
Architecture History Survey II 
3 
ARCH 402 
Materials and Methods II 
3 
ARCH 511 
Introduction to Computer Applications in Architecture 
3 
 
Liberal Arts 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Lower Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARCH 201 
Design III 
6 
ARCH 521 
Introduction to Environmental Systems I 
3 
ARCH 501 
Stuctures I (Statics) 
3 
ARCH 901 
Programming 
3 
 
Professional Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Lower Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARCH 202 
Design IV 
6 
ARCH 651 
Principles of Urban Design 
3 
ARCH 522 
Introduction to Environmental Systems II 
3 
ARCH 502 
Structures II (Strength) 
3 
 
Professional Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Upper Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARCH 203 
Design V 
6 
ARCH 951 
Construction Documents I 
3 
 
Professional Elective 
3 
 
Professional Elective 
3 
 
Liberal Arts 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Upper Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARCH 204 
Design VI 
6 
 
Professional Elective 
3 
 
Professional Elective 
3 
 
Liberal Arts 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior (5th) Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARCH 205 
Design VII 
6 
ARCH 891 
Thesis Preparation 
3 
 
Professional Elective 
3 
 
Professional Elective 
3 
 
Professional Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Senior (5th) Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ARCH 206 
Design VIII (Thesis) 
6 
ARCH 751 
Professional Practice 
3 
 
Professional Elective 
3 
 
Liberal Studies Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
170 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Liberal Arts 

Professional Elective 

Liberal Studies Elective 


Chemical Engineering 
Chemical Engineering (B.S.) 
The Bachelor of Science in Chemical Engineering (BSChE) degree program is accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET. Students seeking the (BSChE) degree must complete a minimum of 120 credits. This includes 62 credits in Math Sciences, Humanities, Social Sciences and 52 core Engineering credits. Chemical Engineering primarily deals with the many aspects of processes in which matter and energy undergo change. It is based on the sciences of chemistry, physics and mathematics and the principles of economics and environmental protection. 
Type: B.S. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Choose between ENGW 101, 102, or 104. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EGPP 101 
Introduction to Engineering 
2 
MATH 156 
Calculus I 
4 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 005 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
ENGW 101 
Rhetoric, Inquiry & Critical Writing 
3 
ENGW 102 
Expository Writing & Literacy Studies 
3 
ENGW 104 
Writing, Literacy & Discourse 
3 
 
Elective - Humanities/Social Sciences/African American Studies 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*Choose between ENGW 103 or ENGW 105 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEG 102 
Introduction to Engineering Design 
3 
MATH 157 
Calculus II 
4 
CHEM 004 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
ENGW 103 
Persuasive Writing & Research 
3 
ENGW 105 
Reflective Writing and Portfolios 
3 
 
Elective - Humanities/Social Sciences/African American Studies 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEG 201 
Chemical Engineering Material Balances 
3 
CSCI 165 
Scientific Computing for Eng 
3 
MATH 158 
Calculus III 
4 
CHEM 141 
Organic Chemistry 
3 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 023, 024, 025 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students Laboratory 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEG 202 
Chemical Engineering Energy Balances 
3 
MATH 159 
Differential Equations 
4 
CHEM 142 
Organic Chemistry 
3 
CHEM 145 
Organic Chemistry Laboratory 
3 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEG 301 
Fluid Mechanics 
3 
CHEG 303 
Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics 
3 
CHEM 171 
Physical Chemistry Lecture 
3 
CHEM 173 
Physical Chemistry Laboratory 
2 
EECE 310 
Principles of Electronics 
2 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Technical Elective (Courses under code BIOL, CHEM, PHYS, MATH, ECON, CIEG, CHEG, CSCI, SYSC, INFO, EECE, & MEEG level 000 to 299) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEG 302 
Heat Transfer 
3 
CHEG 306 
Chemical Engineering Analysis 
3 
CHEM 172 
Physical Chemistry Lecture 
3 
 
Elective - Humanities/Social Sciences/African American Studies 
3 
 
Technical Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEG 401 
Separation Process/Mass Transfer 
3 
CHEG 403 
Chemical Reaction Engineering 
3 
CHEG 405 
Chemical Engineering Laboratory 
3 
CHEG 407 
Process Design I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Ch. E. Elective (Options: Courses under code CHEG) 
*Ch. E. Elective and Engineering Elective - To be determined in consultation with advisor. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
CHEG 402 
Process Control 
3 
CHEG 414 
Process Design II 
3 
 
Ch. E. Elective 
3 
 
Engineering Elective (Options: Courses under code CHEG, EECE, MEEG, ) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Elective - Humanities/Social Sciences/African American Studies 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Technical Elective 

Ch. E. Elective 

Engineering Elective (Options: Courses under code CHEG, EECE, MEEG, ) 


Mechanical Engineering 
Mechanical Engineering (B.S.) 
The Department of Mechanical Engineering offers studies leading to the Bachelor of Science in Mechanical Engineering. Mechanical Engineers apply the principles of mechanics and energy to the design of machines and devices. They must be able to control mechanical systems and usually work with other professionals in designing these systems. Automobiles, engines, heating and air-conditioning system, gas and steam turbines, air and space vehicles, trains, ships, servomechanisms, transmission mechanisms, machine tools, material handling systems, elevators and escalators, and robots used in industry are a few of the systems and devices requiring mechanical engineering knowledge. 
Type: B.S. 
                                          Technical Electives 
• 
For technical electives in design and manufacturing, elective options include the following courses: MEEG 421, MEEG 443, MEEG 444, MEEG 445, and MEEG 450. 


• 
For technical electives in energy, elective options include the following courses: MEEG 438, MEEG 445, MEEG 461, and MEEG 462 


• 
For technical electives in applied mechanics and aerospace, elective options include the following courses: MEEG 308, MEEG 318, MEEG 416, MEEG 418, MEEG 445, and MEEG 447 



Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 101/102/104 
3 
MATH 156 
Calculus I 
4 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
EGPP 101 
Introduction to Engineering 
2 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
ENGW 103/105 
3 
MATH 157 
Calculus II 
4 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 023, 024, 025 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students Laboratory 
1 
MEEG 103 
Introduction to Computer Aided Design 
2 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Social Science/Humanities Elective 
3 
MATH 158 
Calculus III 
4 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 023, 024, 025 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students Laboratory 
1 
MEEG 207 
Introduction to Engineering Computations 
3 
CIEG 202 
Statics 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 159 
Differential Equations 
4 
CIEG 302 
Dynamics 
3 
MEEG 204 
Solid Mechanics, 
3 
EECE 310 
Principles of Electronics 
2 
MEEG 206 
Solid Mechanics Lab 
1 
MEEG 209 
Material Science 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MEEG 304 
Thermodynamics 
3 
MEEG 307 
Fluid Mechanics I 
3 
MEEG 310 
Mechanical Design I 
3 
MEEG 319 
Manufacturing 
3 
MATH 189 
Probability and Statistics I 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MEEG 301 
System Dynamics 
3 
MEEG 306 
Applied Thermodynamics 
3 
MEEG 311 
Mechanical Design II 
3 
MEEG 316 
Instrumentation & Experimentation Lab 
2 
MEEG 320 
Fluid Mechanics II 
3 
MEEG 350 
Computer Aided Engineering 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Technical Elective - Options: Courses under code MEEG 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MEEG 403 
Heat Transfer 
3 
MEEG 423 
Thermal/Fluid Science Lab 
1 
MEEG 441 
Senior Project I 
3 
 
Technical Elective 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*General Elective - Refer to Mechanical Engineering Undergraduate Handbook 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Social Science/Humanities Elective 
3 
MEEG 442 
Senior Project II 
3 
 
Technical Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
ENGW 101/102/104 
ENGW: Placement based on ACTE/SATW scores used by the English department. 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

ENGW 103/105 

Social Science/Humanities Elective 

Technical Elective 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 


Computer Engineering 
Computer Engineering (B.S.) 
The Department offers a program of study geared to students who wish to pursue careers in the emerging field of software engineering. The undergraduate curriculum provides students with a comprehensive knowledge of the theory, design and application of digital computers, information processing technologies and systems engineering. The program is accredited by the Computing Accreditation Commission of ABET. 
Type: B.S. 
NOTES: EECE 212 & 218 (Fall) followed by EECE 406 & 412 (Spring) can be taken in the Freshman year if the students schedule requires adjustment due to math placement or course scheduling conflicts. 
The two-semester English writing sequence is determined by the placement exam: 
Students placed into ENGW 102 must take ENGW 103 to complete their writing sequence 
Students placed into ENGW 104 must take ENGW 105 to complete their writing sequence 
Preferred Humanities courses are: PHIL-051 (Principles of Reasoning) or PHIL-175 (Symbolic Logic)  
Type: 
B.S. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 156 
Calculus I 
4 
EGPP 101 
Introduction to Engineering 
2 
CSCI 135 
Computer Science I 
4 
CHEM 003 
General Chemistry and Recitation 
4 
CHEM 005 
General Chemistry Laboratory 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 157 
Calculus II 
4 
EECE 102 
Introduction to Electrical & Computer Engineering 
1 
EECE 260 
Engineering Programming & Application 
3 
PHYS 013 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 023, 024, 025 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students Laboratory 
1 
MATH 181 
Discrete Structures 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 158 
Calculus III 
4 
PHYS 014 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
3 
PHYS 023, 024, 025 
General Physics for Science and Engineering Students Laboratory 
1 
EECE 212 
Fundamentals of Digital Systems 
4 
EECE 218 
Fundamentals of Digital Systems Design Laboratory 
1 
MATH 159 
Differential Equations 
4 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EECE 160 
Engineering Mathematics 
4 
EECE 203 
Fundamentals of Circuit Theory 
4 
EECE 209 
Fundamentals of Circuit Theory Lab 
1 
EECE 406 
Advanced Digital Systems Design 
3 
EECE 412 
Advanced Digital Systems Design Laboratory 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Junior Year First Semester 
*ENGW 104 or ENGW 102 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EECE 305 
Fundamental: Electromagnetics 
4 
EECE 306 
Fundamental: Electromagnetics Lab 
1 
EECE 309 
Fundamentals of Electronics & SS Devices 
4 
EECE 312 
Fund: Elec & SS Devices Lab 
1 
EECE 331 
Probability & Statistics for Eng Appl 
3 
ENGW 104 
Writing, Literacy & Discourse 
3 
ENGW 102 
Expository Writing & Literacy Studies 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*ENGW 105 or ENGW 103 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EECE 333 
Fundamentals of Signals and Systems 
4 
EECE 416 
Microcomputer Design 
3 
EECE 410 
Introduction to Computer Networks 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
ENGW 105 
Reflective Writing and Portfolios 
3 
ENGW 103 
Persuasive Writing & Research 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EECE 401 
Senior Design I 
3 
EECE 420 
Introduction to VLSI Design 
3 
EECE 423 
VLSI Lab 
1 
CSCI 201 
Computer Organization I 
3 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Senior Year Second Semester 
CpE Elective (Courses under code SYSC or CSCI) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
EECE 404 
Senior Design II 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
 
CpE Elective 
3 
 
Math/Science Elective Course 
3 
 
Humanities Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Social Science Elective 

CpE Elective 

Math/Science Elective Course 

Humanities Elective 


School of Business 
School of Business 
Management & Hospitality Management Department 
Finance & International Business 
Finance 
Finance (B.B.A.) 
The Finance program offers a comprehensive, intensive, and rigorous curriculum for students who wish to pursue careers in corporate finance, investments, investment banking, commercial banking, financial analysis, personal financial planning, and other areas of the global financial services industry. 
IMPORTANT: *A grade of “C” or better must be earned in each of the two required math courses in order to fulfill the math requirement and in order to enroll in each and every school of business junior-level and senior-level course. Only 3 credit hours will be awarded for each required math course. 
Type: B.B.A. 
Type: 
B.B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
English Writing Course 
3 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
INFO 010 
Business Problem Solving 
2 
MGMT 010 
Business Orientation 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
English Writing Course 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
ACCT 201 
Accounting Principles I 
3 
MGMT 011 
Business Orientation II 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Literature Elective (Courses under AFRO, AFST, SPAN, ENGG, ENGL) 
**Physical Education - One course should be Physical Education - Activity and the other should be Physical Education - Health. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
 
Literature Elective 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
ACCT 202 
Accounting Principles II 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MGMT 001 
Career Counseling 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 180 
Statistics for Business and Economics 
3 
 
History or Political Sci. Elective (Options: Courses in codes HIST or POLS) 
3 
 
Foreign Language (Level 2+) 
3 
INFO 204 
Management Information Systems 
3 
FINA 312 
Business Finance 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INFO 311 
Quantitative Business Analysis 
3 
BCOM 320 
Business Communications 
3 
MGMT 301 
Management & OB 
3 
FINA 313 
Financial Management 
3 
MKTG 301 
Principles of Marketing 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FINA 330 
 Principles of Investments 
3 
FINA 363 
Computer Application of Financial Analysis 
3 
BLAW 305 
Business Law I 
3 
BECN 330 
Managerial Economics 
3 
MGMT 351 
Entrepreneurship 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Finance Elective (Courses under subject code FINA) 
 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INFO 335 
Production and Operations Management 
3 
 
Finance Elective 
3 
 
Finance Elective 
3 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Science Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Finance Elective (Courses under subject code FINA) 
**Non-Business Elective (Courses level 000 to 299) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FINA 380 
Business Finance Policy and Decision Making 
3 
 
Finance Elective 
3 
MGMT 390 
Business Policy 
3 
 
Non-Business Elective 
3 
 
Non-Business Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
English Writing Course 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW. 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Literature Elective 
Courses under AFRO, AFST, SPAN, ENGG, & ENGL 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

History or Political Sci. Elective (Options: Courses in codes HIST or POLS) 

Foreign Language (Level 2+) 

Finance Elective 

Philosophy (Elective) 

Science Elective 
Courses under subject codes CHEM, PHYS, BIOL, BIOG, and BIOC 

Non-Business Elective 


Finance – Actuarial Science Concentration (B.B.A.) 
The Finance program with the Actuarial Science concentration at Howard University offers a comprehensive, intensive, and rigorous curriculum for students who wish to pursue careers in corporate finance, investments, investment banking, financial analysis, personal financial planning, and other areas of the global financial services industry. The department is also affiliated with the two professional industry centers: the centers for Insurance Education (CIE) and the Center for Financial Services (CFS). 
IMPORTANT: *A grade of “C” or better must be earned in each of the two required math courses in order to fulfill the math requirement and in order to enroll in each and every school of business junior-level and senior-level course. Only 3 credit hours will be awarded for each required math course. 
Type: B.B.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition, English, or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
English Writing Course 
3 
MATH 156 
Calculus I 
4 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
 
History or Political Sci. Elective (Options: Courses in codes HIST or POLS) 
3 
INFO 010 
Business Problem Solving 
2 
MGMT 010 
Business Orientation 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
English Writing Course 
3 
MATH 157 
Calculus II 
4 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ACCT 201 
Accounting Principles I 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MGMT 011 
Business Orientation II 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 158 
Calculus III 
4 
MATH 159 
Differential Equations 
4 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ACCT 202 
Accounting Principles II 
3 
MGMT 001 
Career Counseling 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MATH 189 
Probability and Statistics I 
3 
 
Foreign Language (Level 2+) 
3 
INFO 204 
Management Information Systems 
3 
FINA 312 
Business Finance 
3 
MATH 168 
Actuarial Science Laboratory I 
1 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INSU 350 
Risk and Insurance 
3 
MATH 190 
Probability and Statistics II 
3 
BCOM 320 
Business Communications 
3 
INFO 311 
Quantitative Business Analysis 
3 
MKTG 301 
Principles of Marketing 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FINA 363 
Computer Application of Financial Analysis 
3 
INSU 351 
Life and Health Insurance 
3 
BLAW 305 
Business Law I 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
BECN 330 
Managerial Economics 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FINA 313 
Financial Management 
3 
INSU 352 
Property Liability Insurance 
3 
MATH 193 
Actuarial Science Seminar 
3 
ECON 184 
Introduction to Econometrics 
3 
MGMT 301 
Management & OB 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FINA 380 
Business Finance Policy and Decision Making 
3 
INSU 354 
Risk Management 
3 
INFO 335 
Production and Operations Management 
3 
MGMT 390 
Business Policy 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
12 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
English Writing Course 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW. 

History or Political Sci. Elective (Options: Courses in codes HIST or POLS) 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Foreign Language (Level 2+) 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 


Finance — Risk Management & Insurance Concentration (B.B.A) 
The Finance program with the Risk Management & Insurance concentration at Howard University offers a comprehensive, intensive, and rigorous curriculum for students who wish to pursue careers in the insurance industry, finance, investments, financial analysis, personal financial planning, and other areas of the global financial services industry. The department is also affiliated with the two professional industry centers: the centers for Insurance Education (CIE) and the Center for Financial Services (CFS). 
IMPORTANT: *A grade of “C” or better must be earned in each of the two required math courses in order to fulfill the math requirement and in order to enroll in each and every school of business junior-level and senior-level course. Only 3 credit hours will be awarded for each required math course. 
Type: B.B.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition, English, or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW)  
Type: 
B.B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
English Writing Course 
3 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
INFO 010 
Business Problem Solving 
2 
MGMT 010 
Business Orientation 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
English Writing Course 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
ACCT 201 
Accounting Principles I 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MGMT 011 
Business Orientation II 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Literature Elective (Courses under AFRO, AFST, SPAN, ENGG, ENGL) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
 
Literature Elective 
3 
ACCT 202 
Accounting Principles II 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MGMT 001 
Career Counseling 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 180 
Statistics for Business and Economics 
3 
 
Foreign Language (Level 2+) 
3 
 
History or Poli. Sci. Elective (Options: Courses in codes HIST or POLS) 
3 
INFO 204 
Management Information Systems 
3 
FINA 312 
Business Finance 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Science Elective (Courses under CHEM, PHYS, BIOL, BIOG, BIOC) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INSU 350 
Risk and Insurance 
3 
BCOM 320 
Business Communications 
3 
INFO 311 
Quantitative Business Analysis 
3 
 
Science Elective 
3 
MKTG 301 
Principles of Marketing 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INSU 351 
Life and Health Insurance 
3 
FINA 363 
Computer Application of Financial Analysis 
3 
BLAW 305 
Business Law I 
3 
BECN 330 
Managerial Economics 
3 
 
Finance Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Non-Business Elective (Courses level 000 to 299) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FINA 313 
Financial Management 
3 
FINA 330 
 Principles of Investments 
3 
INSU 352 
Property Liability Insurance 
3 
MGMT 301 
Management & OB 
3 
 
Non-Business Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
FINA 380 
Business Finance Policy and Decision Making 
3 
INSU 354 
Risk Management 
3 
MGMT 351 
Entrepreneurship 
3 
INFO 335 
Production and Operations Management 
3 
MGMT 390 
Business Policy 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
English Writing Course 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW. 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Literature Elective 
Courses under AFRO, AFST, SPAN, ENGG, & ENGL 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Foreign Language (Level 2+) 

History or Poli. Sci. Elective (Options: Courses in codes HIST or POLS) 

Science Elective 
Courses under subject codes CHEM, PHYS, BIOL, BIOG, and BIOC 

Finance Elective 

Non-Business Elective 


International Business 
International Business (B.B.A.) 
The International Business program at Howard University offers a Bachelors of Business Administration degree in two concentrations which are Functional and Regional. The Functional concentration includes courses in Finance, Risk Management & Insurance, Marketing, Accounting, Management, Information Systems, Supply Chain Management, etc. The Regional concentration covers emerging Nations, Europe, Latin America, Middle East/North Africa, and Sub-Saharan Africa. 
IMPORTANT: 
*A grade of “C” or better must be earned in each of the two required math courses in order to fulfill the math requirement and in order to enroll in each and every school of business junior-level and senior-level course. Only 3 credit hours will be awarded for each required math course. 
**International business majors must complete a minimum of 4 semesters of a non-native foreign language, starting at level two or above, with one semester at the conversational level. IB majors who complete the conversational level in less than four semesters may choose to take another language until the four-semester foreign language minimum is completed. Students without Level 1 credits must complete these courses or their equivalent before taking Level 2+. 
***International Business majors with a Functional Area Concentration in Finance must enroll in FINA 312. 
Students must select a Functional or Regional Concentration. 
Type: B.B.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
***Int'l Business Elective (Courses under INBU) 
****Functional Area (Courses under ACCT, FINA, MGMT, BECN, MKTG, or ECON)  
Type: 
B.B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
English Writing Course 
3 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
 
Foreign Language (Level 2+) 
3 
INFO 010 
Business Problem Solving 
2 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MGMT 010 
Business Orientation 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
English Writing Course 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
 
Foreign Language (Level 3+) 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
MGMT 011 
Business Orientation II 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language (Level 4+) 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ACCT 201 
Accounting Principles I 
3 
INFO 204 
Management Information Systems 
3 
MGMT 001 
Career Counseling 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Foreign Language (Conversation) 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ACCT 202 
Accounting Principles II 
3 
ECON 180 
Statistics for Business and Economics 
3 
BCOM 320 
Business Communications 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INFO 311 
Quantitative Business Analysis 
3 
INBU 300 
Principles of International Business 
3 
MKTG 301 
Principles of Marketing 
3 
BLAW 305 
Business Law I 
3 
MGMT 301 
Management & OB 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INFO 335 
Production and Operations Management 
3 
INBU 320 
International Marketing 
3 
FINA 311 
Finance Principles 
3 
 
Science Elective 
3 
ANTH 110 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INBU 340 
International Financial Management 
3 
 
Int'l Business Elective 
3 
BECN 330 
Managerial Economics 
3 
 
Sequence Elective 
3 
 
Sequence Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INBU 360 
Management of International Business 
3 
MGMT 390 
Business Policy 
3 
 
Sequence Elective 
3 
 
Sequence Elective 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
English Writing Course 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW. 

Foreign Language (Level 2+) 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Foreign Language (Level 3+) 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Foreign Language (Level 4+) 

Foreign Language (Conversation) 

Science Elective 
Courses under subject codes CHEM, PHYS, BIOL, BIOG, and BIOC 

Int'l Business Elective 
Courses under subject code INBU 

Sequence Elective 
Accounting Sequence 
ACCT 310 
Intermediate Accounting I 
3 
ACCT 311 
Intermediate Accounting II 
3 
*2 additional Accounting Courses (ACCT ***) 
Finance Sequence 
FINA 313 
Financial Management 
3 
FINA 380 
Business Finance Policy and Decision Making 
3 
*2 Additional Finance, Insurance, and/or Real Estate Courses. 
Computer Information Systems 
INFO 210 
Introduction to Software Design 
3 
INFO 330 
Data Base Management 
3 
INFO 370 
Systems Analysis and Design 
3 
INFO 385 
Introduction to E Business 
3 
Insurance 
INSU 350 
Risk and Insurance 
3 
INSU 351 
Life and Health Insurance 
3 
INSU 352 
Property Liability Insurance 
3 
INSU 354 
Risk Management 
3 
Management 
MGMT 303 
Human Resources Management 
3 
MGMT 351 
Entrepreneurship 
3 
*2 Additional Courses in Management and/or Hospitality. 
Marketing 
MKTG 315 
Marketing Research 
3 
MKTG 399 
Marketing Planning and Strategy 
3 
*2 Additional Marketing Courses (MKTG). 
Supply Chain Management 
SCHM 211 
Introduction to Logistics 
3 
SCHM 340 
Procurement 
3 
SCHM 390 
Supply Chain Integration 
3 
INFO 396 
Project Management 
3 
Entrepreneurship 
MGMT 350 
Management of Small Business 
3 
MGMT 351 
Entrepreneurship 
3 
MGMT 355 
New Venture Development 
3 
INBU 380 
International Entrepreneurship 
3 
MGMT 356 
Entrepreneurship Externship 
3 
Regional - Asia 
Recommended Language(s): Chinese, Japanese, Korean 
Consult with Finance & Int’l Business Department Chairperson for Requirements 
Availability and Prerequisites are subject to change according to the host department 
Regional - Emerging Nations 
ECON 192 
International Commercial Policy 
3 
ECON 194 
Theory of Economic Development 
3 
POLS 128 
International Relations 
3 
POLS 170 
Government and Politics of Central America and the Caribbean 
3 
Recommended Language(s): Arabic, Chinese, French, Portuguese, Spanish. 
Availability and Prerequisites are subject to change according to the host department 
Regional - Europe 
ECON 192 
International Commercial Policy 
3 
HIST 101 
World Geography 
3 
POLS 128 
International Relations 
3 
POLS 170 
Government and Politics of Central America and the Caribbean 
3 
Recommended Language(s): French, German, Russian, Spanish 
Availability and Prerequisites are subject to change according to the host department 
Regional - Latin America 
ECON 192 
International Commercial Policy 
3 
HIST 142 
Latin History to 1825 
3 
HIST 143 
Latin History Since 1825 
3 
POLS 170 
Government and Politics of Central America and the Caribbean 
3 
Recommended Language(s): Portuguese, Spanish 
Availability and Prerequisites are subject to change according to the host department 
Regional - Middle East & North Africa 
ECON 192 
International Commercial Policy 
3 
ECON 194 
Theory of Economic Development 
3 
HIST 192 
Islam in Africa 
3 
POLS 128 
International Relations 
3 
Recommended Language(s): Arabic, Farsi, French 
Availability and Prerequisites are subject to change according to the host department 
Regional - Sub-Saharan Africa 
ECON 186 
Economic Development in Africa 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
POLS 128 
International Relations 
3 
POLS 176 
Government and Politics in Tropical Africa 
3 
French, Portuguese, Swahili, Wolof 
Availability and Prerequisites are subject to change according to the host department 
 


Information Systems & Supply Chain Management 
Computer Information Systems (B.B.A.) 
The Department of Information Systems in the Howard University School of Business supports the core Business Administration curriculum and offers a degree programs at the undergraduate level (Computer Information Systems). The Information System major integrates business and computing. Information Systems focuses primarily on the role that information and technology play in creating business solutions. 
IMPORTANT: *A grade of “C” or better must be earned in each of the two required math courses in order to fulfill the math requirement and in order to enroll in each and every school of business junior-level and senior-level course. Only 3 credit hours will be awarded for each required math course. 
Type: B.B.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
Type: 
B.B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
English Writing Course 
3 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
INFO 010 
Business Problem Solving 
2 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MGMT 010 
Business Orientation 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
English Writing Course 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
 
Foreign Language (Level 2+) 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MGMT 011 
Business Orientation II 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 180 
Statistics for Business and Economics 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ACCT 201 
Accounting Principles I 
3 
INFO 204 
Management Information Systems 
3 
MGMT 001 
Career Counseling 
1 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
History or Poli. Sci. Elective (Options: Courses in codes HIST or POLS) 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ACCT 202 
Accounting Principles II 
3 
INFO 210 
Introduction to Software Design 
3 
BCOM 320 
Business Communications 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
*Science Elective (Courses under CHEM, PHYS, BIOL, BIOG, and BIOC) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INFO 311 
Quantitative Business Analysis 
3 
INFO 330 
Data Base Management 
3 
 
Science Elective 
3 
MGMT 301 
Management & OB 
3 
MKTG 301 
Principles of Marketing 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INFO 335 
Production and Operations Management 
3 
FINA 311 
Finance Principles 
3 
BLAW 305 
Business Law I 
3 
INFO 370 
Systems Analysis and Design 
3 
 
Programming Language 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Non-Business Elective (Courses level 000 to 299) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Computer Information Systems Elective* (Options: Courses under code INFO) 
3 
 
Computer Information Systems Elective* (Options: Courses under code INFO) 
3 
BECN 330 
Managerial Economics 
3 
 
Non-Business Elective 
3 
 
Non-Business Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INFO 398 
Information Systems Consulting 
3 
MGMT 351 
Entrepreneurship 
3 
 
Computer Information Systems Elective* (Options: Courses under code INFO) 
3 
 
Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057 and 059) 
3 
MGMT 390 
Business Policy 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
English Writing Course 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW. 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Foreign Language (Level 2+) 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

History or Poli. Sci. Elective (Options: Courses in codes HIST or POLS) 

Science Elective 
Courses under subject codes CHEM, PHYS, BIOL, BIOG, and BIOC 

Programming Language 
Courses with subject code INFO. 

Computer Information Systems Elective* (Options: Courses under code INFO) 
INFO 101 
Cooperative Program I 
2 
INFO 102 
Cooperative Program II 
2 
INFO 202 
Computer Introduction 
1 
INFO 204 
Management Information Systems 
3 
INFO 210 
Introduction to Software Design 
3 
INFO 300 
Structured COBOL Programming I 
3 
INFO 302 
Introduction to C Language Programming 
3 

Non-Business Elective 

Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057 and 059) 
PHIL 051 
Principles of Reasoning 
3 
PHIL 053 
Introduction to Philosophy of Science 
3 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 
PHIL 057 
Introduction to Ethics 
3 
PHIL 059 
Knowledge and Value 
3 


Supply Chain Management (B.B.A.) 
The undergraduate academic program leads to the degree of Bachelor of Business Administration with a major in Supply Chain Management (SCM). The Supply Chain Management discipline teaches students about the identification, acquisition, access, positioning, management of resources and related capabilities a company needs or potentially needs in the attainment of its strategic objectives. 
IMPORTANT: *A grade of “C” or better must be earned in each of the two required math courses in order to fulfill the math requirement and in order to enroll in each and every school of business junior-level and senior-level course. Only 3 credit hours will be awarded for each required math course. 
Type: B.B.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGW) 
***SCHM Elective (Options: Courses under subject code SCHM) 
****Non-Business Elective (Courses level 000 to 299) 
Type: 
B.B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
History or Poli. Sci. Elective (Options: Courses in codes HIST or POLS) 
3 
INFO 010 
Business Problem Solving 
2 
MGMT 010 
Business Orientation 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
 
Foreign Language (Level 2+) 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MGMT 011 
Business Orientation II 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ACCT 201 
Accounting Principles I 
3 
INFO 204 
Management Information Systems 
3 
ECON 180 
Statistics for Business and Economics 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MGMT 001 
Career Counseling 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*Literature Elective (Courses under subject codes AFRO, AFST, SPAN, ENGG, and ENGL) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ACCT 202 
Accounting Principles II 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Literature Elective 
3 
BCOM 320 
Business Communications 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SCHM 211 
Introduction to Logistics 
3 
INFO 311 
Quantitative Business Analysis 
3 
MGMT 301 
Management & OB 
3 
FINA 311 
Finance Principles 
3 
MKTG 301 
Principles of Marketing 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
*Science Elective (Courses under subject codes CHEM, PHYS, BIOL, BIOG, and BIOC) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INFO 335 
Production and Operations Management 
3 
SCHM 340 
Procurement 
3 
BLAW 305 
Business Law I 
3 
BECN 330 
Managerial Economics 
3 
 
Science Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INFO 396 
Project Management 
3 
SCHM 360 
Negotiation Fundamentals 
3 
 
SCHM Elective 
3 
 
SCHM Elective 
3 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
SCHM Elective 
3 
SCHM 390 
Supply Chain Integration 
3 
MGMT 351 
Entrepreneurship 
3 
MGMT 390 
Business Policy 
3 
 
Non-Business Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

History or Poli. Sci. Elective (Options: Courses in codes HIST or POLS) 

Foreign Language (Level 2+) 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Literature Elective 
Courses under AFRO, AFST, SPAN, ENGG, & ENGL 

Science Elective 
Courses under subject codes CHEM, PHYS, BIOL, BIOG, and BIOC 

SCHM Elective 
Options: Courses under subject code SCHM 

Philosophy (Elective) 

Non-Business Elective 


Accounting 
Accounting (B.B.A.) 
The Accounting Curriculum, which offers a Bachelor of Business Administration degree, is accredited by the AACSB International (Association for the Advancement of Collegiate Schools of Business). Howard’s Accounting Program is the first to be accredited in Washington, DC and the metropolitan area and one of approximately 150 accredited accounting programs in the United States. The accreditation for the School of Business is highly regarded by both employers and potential students. 
IMPORTANT: *A grade of “C” or better must be earned in each of the two required math courses in order to fulfill the math requirement and in order to enroll in each and every school of business junior-level and senior-level course. Only 3 credit hours will be awarded for each required math course. 
Type: B.B.A. 
Type: 
B.B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*English Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW). 
 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
English Writing Course 
3 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
INFO 010 
Business Problem Solving 
2 
MGMT 010 
Business Orientation 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
*English Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW). 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
English Writing Course 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
 
Foreign Language (Level 2+) 
3 
 
History or Poli. Sci. Elective (Options: Courses in codes HIST or POLS) 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
MGMT 011 
Business Orientation II 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Science Elective (Courses under CHEM, PHYS, BIOL, BIOG, and BIOC) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ACCT 201 
Accounting Principles I 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
INFO 204 
Management Information Systems 
3 
 
Science Elective 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MGMT 001 
Career Counseling 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ACCT 202 
Accounting Principles II 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ECON 180 
Statistics for Business and Economics 
3 
BCOM 320 
Business Communications 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ACCT 310 
Intermediate Accounting I 
3 
ACCT 350 
Accounting Information Systems 
3 
INFO 311 
Quantitative Business Analysis 
3 
MGMT 301 
Management & OB 
3 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ACCT 311 
Intermediate Accounting II 
3 
ACCT 320 
Cost Accounting I 
3 
MKTG 301 
Principles of Marketing 
3 
BLAW 305 
Business Law I 
3 
FINA 311 
Finance Principles 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ACCT 318 
Tax Principles and Procedures 
3 
ACCT 340 
Auditing I 
3 
MGMT 351 
Entrepreneurship 
3 
BECN 330 
Managerial Economics 
3 
INFO 335 
Production and Operations Management 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ACCT 330 
Advanced Accounting 
3 
 
Accounting Elective (options: 3 credit course in code ACCT, requires advisors approval) 
3 
 
Accounting Elective (options: 3 credit course in code ACCT, requires advisors approval) 
3 
MGMT 390 
Business Policy 
3 
 
Humanities Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
English Writing Course 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW. 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Foreign Language (Level 2+) 

History or Poli. Sci. Elective (Options: Courses in codes HIST or POLS) 

Science Elective 
Courses under subject codes CHEM, PHYS, BIOL, BIOG, and BIOC 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Philosophy (Elective) 

Accounting Elective (options: 3 credit course in code ACCT, requires advisors approval) 

Humanities Elective 


Management 
Management (B.B.A.) 
The management program is Built upon a basic foundation of general education and the business core, the undergraduate program clearly offers a broad-based professional education in management. We are in an era in which professional interests and larger social considerations tend to be in conflict at every turn, and professional education programs all over the country are competing with one another in their attempts to develop the ideal curriculum. A sound undergraduate business education must emphasize the broader facets of the general education requirements as well as the business core subjects. In our times of growing social awareness, meeting this challenge would appear to be essential. It is important, therefore, to emphasize that our program is designed to prepare our graduates to meet both professional and societal expectations. 
IMPORTANT: *A grade of “C” or better must be earned in each of the two required math courses in order to fulfill the math requirement and in order to enroll in each and every school of business junior-level and senior-level course. Only 3 credit hours will be awarded for each required math course. 
Type: B.B.A. 
*Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
**Literature Elective (Courses under AFRO, AFST, SPAN, ENGG, & ENGL) 
***Science Elective (Courses under CHEM, PHYS, BIOL, BIOG, and BIOC) 
****Non-Business Elective (Courses level 000 to 299) 
*****Management Elective (Options: Courses under subject code MGMT) 
 
 
Type: 
B.B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
English Writing Course 
3 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
History or Political Sci. Elective (Options: Courses in codes HIST or POLS) 
3 
INFO 010 
Business Problem Solving 
2 
MGMT 010 
Business Orientation 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
English Writing Course 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
 
Foreign Language (Level 2+) 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
MGMT 011 
Business Orientation II 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
ACCT 201 
Accounting Principles I 
3 
 
Literature Elective 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MGMT 001 
Career Counseling 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
ACCT 202 
Accounting Principles II 
3 
INFO 204 
Management Information Systems 
3 
ECON 180 
Statistics for Business and Economics 
3 
BCOM 320 
Business Communications 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INFO 311 
Quantitative Business Analysis 
3 
MGMT 301 
Management & OB 
3 
FINA 311 
Finance Principles 
3 
MKTG 301 
Principles of Marketing 
3 
 
Science Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INFO 335 
Production and Operations Management 
3 
MGMT 302 
Advanced Organizational Behavior 
3 
MGMT 303 
Human Resources Management 
3 
BLAW 305 
Business Law I 
3 
 
Non-Business Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
*Choose MGMT 304 - Labor Mngt Relations (3crs) or MGMT 350 - Mngt of Small Business (3crs) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
MGMT 304 or MGMT 350 
3 
MGMT 331 
Decision-Making 
3 
MGMT 351 
Entrepreneurship 
3 
 
Management Elective 
3 
BECN 330 
Managerial Economics 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MGMT 380 
Seminar in Management 
3 
MGMT 390 
Business Policy 
3 
 
Management Elective 
3 
 
Non-Business Elective 
3 
 
Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057 and 059) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
English Writing Course 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW. 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

History or Political Sci. Elective (Options: Courses in codes HIST or POLS) 

Foreign Language (Level 2+) 

Literature Elective 
Courses under AFRO, AFST, SPAN, ENGG, & ENGL 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Science Elective 
Courses under subject codes CHEM, PHYS, BIOL, BIOG, and BIOC 

Non-Business Elective 

MGMT 304 or MGMT 350 

Management Elective 

Philosophy Elective * (Options: Courses under Code PHIL 051, 053, 055, 057 and 059) 
PHIL 051 
Principles of Reasoning 
3 
PHIL 053 
Introduction to Philosophy of Science 
3 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 
PHIL 057 
Introduction to Ethics 
3 
PHIL 059 
Knowledge and Value 
3 


Business Law 
Marketing 
Marketing (B.B.A.) 
The Marketing Program, which offers a Bachelor of Business Administration degree, provides students with exposure to and depth of immersion in Marketing needed to understand how for-profit and non-profit organizations need to operate successfully and be productive and efficient in a market-oriented economy. 
IMPORTANT: *A grade of “C” or better must be earned in each of the two required math courses in order to fulfill the math requirement and in order to enroll in each and every school of business junior-level and senior-level course. Only 3 credit hours will be awarded for each required math course. 
Type: B.B.A. 
*Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
**Literature Elective (Courses under AFRO, AFST, SPAN, ENGG, & ENGL) 
***Science Elective (Courses under CHEM, PHYS, BIOL, BIOG, and BIOC) 
****Marketing Elective (Options: Courses under code MKTG) 
*****Non-Business Elective (Courses level 000 to 299) 
 
Type: 
B.B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
English Writing Course 
3 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
INFO 010 
Business Problem Solving 
2 
MGMT 010 
Business Orientation 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
 
English Writing Course 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
ACCT 201 
Accounting Principles I 
3 
MGMT 011 
Business Orientation II 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*HHPL Elective(s) - Activity (1) and Health (1) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
 
Literature Elective 
3 
ACCT 202 
Accounting Principles II 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
MGMT 001 
Career Counseling 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
ECON 180 
Statistics for Business and Economics 
3 
BCOM 320 
Business Communications 
3 
 
Foreign Language (Level 2+) 
3 
INFO 204 
Management Information Systems 
3 
MKTG 301 
Principles of Marketing 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INFO 311 
Quantitative Business Analysis 
3 
MKTG 310 
Consumer Behavior 
3 
MGMT 301 
Management & OB 
3 
FINA 311 
Finance Principles 
3 
MKTG 315 
Marketing Research 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
BECN 330 
Managerial Economics 
3 
MKTG 361 
Computer Applications in Marketing 
3 
BLAW 305 
Business Law I 
3 
MGMT 351 
Entrepreneurship 
3 
 
Non-Business Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
INFO 335 
Production and Operations Management 
3 
MKTG 320 
Marketing Communications 
3 
 
Marketing Elective 
3 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
 
Science Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MKTG 399 
Marketing Planning and Strategy 
3 
 
Marketing Elective 
3 
 
History or Poli. Sci. Elective (Options: Courses in codes HIST or POLS) 
3 
MGMT 390 
Business Policy 
3 
 
Non-Business Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
English Writing Course 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW. 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Literature Elective 
Courses under AFRO, AFST, SPAN, ENGG, & ENGL 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Foreign Language (Level 2+) 

Non-Business Elective 

Marketing Elective 

Philosophy (Elective) 

Science Elective 
Courses under subject codes CHEM, PHYS, BIOL, BIOG, and BIOC 

History or Poli. Sci. Elective (Options: Courses in codes HIST or POLS) 


Cathy Hughes School of Communications 
Cathy Hughes School of Communications 
Communications 
Department of Media, Journalism and Film (MJFC) 
Media, Journalism & Film 
Media, Journalism and Film — Audio Sequence (B.A.) 
The Department of Media, Journalism and Film (MJFC) prepares students for the media world of today and the future through core and cluster courses. The MJFC department draws from the fields of digital audio/radio, digital video/television, and film production, scriptwriting and reporting, and broadcast (i.e. radio and television), print, mobile and online news. The MJFC Department addresses current industry standards, technological trends of convergence and community needs, while meeting the university's historical mission. 
Type: B.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGW) 
***Minor Elective (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
****Major Elective (Courses under MJFC) 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*MATH 006 or higher 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SCOM 102 
Intro: Comm. Prof. Dev. 
1 
SCOM 120 
Digital Media Literacy 
3 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
MATH 006 
College Algebra I 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MJFC 101 
Introduction to Mass Communications 
3 
SCOM 130 
Ethical Issues in Communication 
3 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Co-Curricular (Courses under subject code MJFC) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MJFC 200 
Intro to Media Production 
3 
MJFC 225 
History of Broadcast & Film 
3 
 
Co-Curricular 
1 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Natural Science Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MJFC 340 
Scriptwriting 
3 
MJFC 331 
Audio for TV & Film 
3 
MJFC 211 
Podcasting 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
*General Elective (Fine Arts) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MJFC 330 
Multimedia Audio Production 
3 
MJFC 332 
Music In Media 
3 
MJFC 301 
Co-Curricular Audi 
1 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MJFC 340 
Scriptwriting 
3 
MJFC 331 
Audio for TV & Film 
3 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
*General Elective (Fine Arts) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
MJFC 410 
Audio Engineering 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MJFC 457 
Practicum-Internship: Audio 
1 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
MJFC 462/463 - Advanced Audio Production 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Social Science Elective 

Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Co-Curricular 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Natural Science Elective 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor 

Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

MJFC 462/463 - Advanced Audio Production 


Media, Journalism and Film — Journalism Sequence (B.A.) 
The Department of Media, Journalism and Film (MJFC) prepares students for the media world of today and the future through core and cluster courses. The MJFC department draws from the fields of digital audio/radio, digital video/television, and film production, scriptwriting and reporting, and broadcast (i.e. radio and television), print, mobile and online news. The MJFC Department addresses current industry standards, technological trends of convergence and community needs, while meeting the university's historical mission. 
Type: B.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGL or ENGW) 
***Minor Course (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SCOM 102 
Intro: Comm. Prof. Dev. 
1 
SCOM 120 
Digital Media Literacy 
3 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
U.S. History 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MJFC 101 
Introduction to Mass Communications 
3 
SCOM 130 
Ethical Issues in Communication 
3 
MJFC 100 
Fundamentals of Journalism 
1 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
17 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*ENGL Course Above 003 (Courses under subject code ENGL). 
**MATH Elective - MATH 006 or higher. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MJFC 200 
Intro to Media Production 
3 
PHIL 051 
Principles of Reasoning 
3 
 
Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (3) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
ENGL Course Above 003 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MJFC 201 
Multimedia Storytelling 
3 
MJFC 202 
Visual Communication 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MJFC 300 
Co-Curricular Journalism 
1 
MJFC 311 
Interactive Editing 
3 
MJFC 310 
Multicultural Media History 
3 
MJFC 330 
Multimedia Audio Production 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MJFC 312 
Digital Design 
3 
MJFC 313 
Public Affairs Reporting 
3 
MJFC 456 
Practicum-Internship: Journalism 
1 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year First Semester 
*MJFC Elective (Options: Courses under subject code MJFC) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
MJFC Elective 
3 
MJFC 301 
Co-Curricular Audi 
1 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Elective 1 Credit (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*Choose between MJFC 300-302 - Co-Curricular: Truth be Told/Audio/TV-Film (1crs) or SCOM 220 - CERRC (1crs) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MJFC 460 
Capstone: News Vision Lab 
6 
 
MJFC 300-302 or SCOM 220 
1 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

U.S. History 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (3) 

ENGL Course Above 003 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor 

MJFC Elective 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

General Elective 1 Credit (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

MJFC 300-302 or SCOM 220 


Media, Journalism and Film — TV and Film Sequence (B.A.) 
The Department of Media, Journalism and Film (MJFC) prepares students for careers in TV and film. The MJFC department draws from the fields of digital digital video/television, and film production, scriptwriting and reporting, and broadcast (i.e. radio and television), print, mobile and online news. The MJFC Department addresses current industry standards, technological trends of convergence and community needs, while meeting the university's historical mission. The Department unifies several intellectual and creative strands within the School that share the common concerns of communicating in effective ways at the local, regional, national and global levels. 
Type: B.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGW) 
***Minor Course (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
****Major Elective (Courses under MJFC) 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Math 005 or higher 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SCOM 102 
Intro: Comm. Prof. Dev. 
1 
SCOM 120 
Digital Media Literacy 
3 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
MATH 005 
College Algebra I WR 
4 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MJFC 200 
Intro to Media Production 
3 
MJFC 101 
Introduction to Mass Communications 
3 
SCOM 130 
Ethical Issues in Communication 
3 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MJFC 225 
History of Broadcast & Film 
3 
MJFC 220 
Film and TV Production 
3 
MJFC 340 
Scriptwriting 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*General/Fine Arts Elective 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MJFC 341 
Editing for Film and TV 
3 
 
Fine Arts Elective (3) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Natural Science Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MJFC 347 
Producing for TV &Film 
3 
 
MJFC 342 or MJFC 343 
3 
MJFC 331 
Audio for TV & Film 
3 
 
Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Fine Arts Elective (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
MJFC 345 
Directing for Film and TV 
3 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
*General/Fine Arts Elective 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (2) 
2 
MJFC 459 
FTV Practicum 
1 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Fine Arts Elective (3) 
3 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year Second Semester 
*General/Fine Arts Elective 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
MJFC 468/468/470 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Fine Arts Elective (3) 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor 

Natural Science Elective 

MJFC 342 or MJFC 343 
Choose between: 
• 
MJFC 342 - Advanced TV Production 

• 
MJFC 343 - Cinematography 



Minor Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 

Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Social Science Elective 

Major Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (2) 

MJFC 468/468/470 
Select one: 
• 
MJFC 468 - FTV Thesis: Production 

• 
MJFC 469 - FTV Thesis: Scriptwriting: TV Episodic 

• 
MJFC 470 - FTV Thesis: Scriptwriting: Feature Film 




Department of Strategic, Legal and Management Communication (SLMC) 
Communication Sciences & Disorders 
Radio, TV, & Film 
Strategic, Legal & Management Communication 
Strategic, Legal and Management - Communication Advertising Sequence (B.A.) 
The Department of Strategic, Legal and Management Communication aims to prepare students for careers in advertising that focuses on developing persuasive messages designed to sell products, services, or ideas. Students will be equipped with persuasive and informative methodologies to enhance the creation and development of messages in a variety of communication contexts including digital media. 
IMPORTANT: Unless otherwise arranged, SOC required courses should be taken within the year designated. Electives and minor courses may be taken as available. 
Type: B.A. 
*General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
**Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGW) 
***Sociology Elective (Options: Courses under subject code SOCI) 
****Minor Requirement (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Mathematics Elective - MATH 005 or higher 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SCOM 102 
Intro: Comm. Prof. Dev. 
1 
SCOM 120 
Digital Media Literacy 
3 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
History or Social Science 
3 
 
Foreign Language/Gen. Elective (Options: See Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Mathematics Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SCOM 130 
Ethical Issues in Communication 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Foreign Language/Gen. Elective (Options: See Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
History or Social Science 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
SLMC 202 or MJFC 101 
3 
SLMC 102 
Fund. of Advert. & Storytellin 
1 
 
English Elective (above 003) 
3 
 
Philosophy (Elective) 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 210 
Intro to Strategic Communication 
3 
SLMC 203 
Principles of Persuasion. 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sociology Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
18 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 301 
Intercultural/International Communication 
3 
SLMC 321 
Advertising Sales 
3 
SLMC 322 
Advertising Copywriting &Design 
3 
 
Psychology or Sociology 
3 
 
Minor Requirement (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 351 
Advanced Public Speaking. 
3 
SLMC 323 
Advertising Research and Marketing 
3 
SLMC 324 
Media Planning and Buying 
3 
 
Minor Requirement (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Requirement (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 402 
Practicum – Internship: Advertising (AD) 
1 
SLMC 410 
Social Media &Integrated Marketing. 
3 
SLMC 491 
CapComm Lab 
3 
 
Minor Requirement (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SCOM 220 
Comm. Entrepreneurship (CERRC) 
1 
 
Communication Elective 
3 
MGMT 301 
Management & OB 
3 
 
Minor Requirement (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Requirement (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

History or Social Science 

Foreign Language/Gen. Elective (Options: See Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 

Mathematics Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
 
MATH 006/007 
3 
- 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 020 
Fundamental Concepts of Mathematics for Education I 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
MATH 084-085 
Directed Readings in Honors for Sophomores 
1 
MATH 160 
Advanced Calculus for Science and Engineering 
3 
MATH 161, 162 
Seminar 
1 
- 
3 
MATH 164 
Introduction to Numerical Analysis 
3 
MATH 165, 166 
Directed Readings. 
1 
- 
3 
MATH 168 
Actuarial Science Laboratory I 
1 
MATH 169 
Actuarial Science Laboratory II 
1 
MATH 190 
Probability and Statistics II 
3 
MATH 191 
Foundations of Applied Mathematics 
3 
MATH 192 
Topics in Applied Mathematics 
3 
MATH 193 
Actuarial Science Seminar 
3 
MATH 196 
Introduction to Analysis II 
3 
MATH 197 
Introduction to Modern Algebra I 
3 
MATH 198 
Introduction to Modern Algebra II 
3 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

SLMC 202 or MJFC 101 
Choose between SLMC 202 - Intro to Comm. Theory (Online) (3crs) and MJFC 101 - Intro to Mass Communications (3crs). 

English Elective (above 003) 
Options: Courses under subject code ENGL 

Philosophy (Elective) 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Sociology Elective 

Psychology or Sociology 

Minor Requirement (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Communication Elective 


Strategic, Legal and Management Communication - Legal Communication Sequence (B.A.) 
The Strategic, Legal and Management Communication (SLMC) Department prepares students for careers and advanced study in communication used for strategic purposes such as public relations and special event planning, advertising and sales, non-profit and for-profit management, law and policy, organizational training and development, corporate communications, government relations, entrepreneurship, human resources, marketing communications and media management. The Legal Communication sequence option focuses on Legal and related issues in the field of communication such as constitutional privilege, statutory law and protected speech. 
IMPORTANT: Unless otherwise arranged, SOC required courses should be taken within the year designated. Electives and Minor courses may be taken as available. 
*Electives and minor courses may be taken as available. 
**SLMC 490 is a pre-requisite for SLMC 492 and cannot be taken simultaneously. 
***General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
****Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGW) 
Type: B.A. 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Mathematics Elective - MATH 006 or higher. 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SCOM 102 
Intro: Comm. Prof. Dev. 
1 
SCOM 120 
Digital Media Literacy 
3 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
POLS 001 
Introduction to Political Science 
3 
 
Mathematics Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SCOM 130 
Ethical Issues in Communication 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
PHIL 051 or PHIL 055 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 202 
Intro to Communication Theory. 
3 
SLMC 203 
Principles of Persuasion. 
3 
POLS 010 
The National Government of the United States 
3 
COMP 004 
Computers and Society 
3 
ENGL 010 
Technical Writing for Pre-Law Students 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 250 
Intro to Leadership and Management Communication. 
3 
SLMC 231 
Mock Trial. 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Minor Requirement (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Health Ed. Elective 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 301 
Intercultural/International Communication 
3 
SLMC 330 
Constitutional Law 
3 
SLMC 331 
Communications Law. 
3 
 
U.S. History Elective 
3 
 
Minor Requirement (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 332 
Intro to Legal Research 
3 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
 
Minor Requirement (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Requirement (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Law Elective 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 490 
Communication Research Methods. 
3 
SLMC 403 
Practicum-Internship: Legal Communication (LC). 
1 
SLMC 351 
Advanced Public Speaking. 
3 
SCOM 220 
Comm. Entrepreneurship (CERRC) 
1 
 
Minor Requirement (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 431 
Conflict Management and Negotiation. 
3 
SLMC 492 
Capstone: Senior Research Project 
3 
 
Communication Elective 
3 
 
Minor Requirement (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
SLMC 325 
SLMC Co-curricular 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

Mathematics Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
 
MATH 006/007 
3 
- 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 020 
Fundamental Concepts of Mathematics for Education I 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
MATH 084-085 
Directed Readings in Honors for Sophomores 
1 
MATH 160 
Advanced Calculus for Science and Engineering 
3 
MATH 161, 162 
Seminar 
1 
- 
3 
MATH 164 
Introduction to Numerical Analysis 
3 
MATH 165, 166 
Directed Readings. 
1 
- 
3 
MATH 168 
Actuarial Science Laboratory I 
1 
MATH 169 
Actuarial Science Laboratory II 
1 
MATH 190 
Probability and Statistics II 
3 
MATH 191 
Foundations of Applied Mathematics 
3 
MATH 192 
Topics in Applied Mathematics 
3 
MATH 193 
Actuarial Science Seminar 
3 
MATH 196 
Introduction to Analysis II 
3 
MATH 197 
Introduction to Modern Algebra I 
3 
MATH 198 
Introduction to Modern Algebra II 
3 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

PHIL 051 or PHIL 055 
Choose between PHIL 051: Principles of Reasoning (3crs) or PHIL 055: Introduction to Philosophy (3crs). 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Minor Requirement (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor 

Health Ed. Elective 
Courses under HHPL and PHAS 

U.S. History Elective 
Courses under subject code HIST 

Social Science Elective 

Law Elective 
Courses under subject codes SLMC, SOCI, and POLS 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

Communication Elective 


Strategic, Legal and Management Communication — Media Management Sequence (B.A.) 
The Department of Strategic, Legal and Management Communication aims to prepare students for careers and advanced study in communication used for strategic purposes such as public relations and special event planning, advertising and sales, non- profit and for-profit management, law and policy, organizational training and development, corporate communications, government relations, entrepreneurship, human resources, marketing communications, and media management. SLMC majors will develop strong critical reasoning, writing and case development, verbal and nonverbal communication, problem solving, research design and implementation. Students will be equipped with persuasive and informative methodologies to enhance the creation and development of messages in a variety of communication contexts including digital media. 
IMPORTANT: Unless otherwise arranged, SOC required courses should be taken within the year designated. 
Type: B.A. 
*Electives and minor courses may be taken as available. 
**SLMC 490 is a pre-requisite for SLMC 492 and cannot be taken simultaneously. 
***General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
****Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGW) 
*****Minor (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) - The minor must be in Business or Economics. 
 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SCOM 102 
Intro: Comm. Prof. Dev. 
1 
SCOM 120 
Digital Media Literacy 
3 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SCOM 130 
Ethical Issues in Communication 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
PHIL 055 
Introduction to Philosophy 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
*Math Elective - MATH 005 or higher 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
 
SLMC 202 or MJFC 101 
3 
SLMC 203 
Principles of Persuasion. 
3 
SLMC 250 
Intro to Leadership and Management Communication. 
3 
ECON 001 
Principles of Economics I 
3 
 
Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (3) 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 241 
Communication Policy. 
3 
SLMC 210 
Intro to Strategic Communication 
3 
ECON 002 
Principles of Economics II 
3 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year First Semester 
*SLMC 341 OR Comm Elective 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 341 
Race, Gender, and Media. 
3 
SLMC 321 
Advertising Sales 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 343 
Programming. 
3 
SLMC 301 
Intercultural/International Communication 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Senior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 490 
Communication Research Methods. 
3 
SLMC 441 
Broadcast Management. 
3 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
SCOM 220 
Comm. Entrepreneurship (CERRC) 
1 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 404 
Practicum-Internship: Media Management (MM). 
1 
SLMC 492 
Capstone: Senior Research Project 
3 
SLMC 325 
SLMC Co-curricular 
1 
 
General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

General Elective (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 

Social Science Elective 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

SLMC 202 or MJFC 101 
Choose between SLMC 202 - Intro to Comm. Theory (Online) (3crs) and MJFC 101 - Intro to Mass Communications (3crs). 

Math Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) (3) 

Minor (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) (3) 
Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 


Strategic, Legal and Management Communication Organizational Comm. - Management Sequence (B.A.) 
The Management Sequence of the Strategic, Legal, & Management Communication degree program focuses on management and leadership issues in media enterprises. The program requires 120 credits to complete requirements for graduation. 
IMPORTANT: Unless otherwise arranged, SOC required courses should be taken within the year designated. 
Type: B.A. 
*Electives and minor courses may be taken as available. 
**SLMC 490 is a pre-requisite for SLMC 492 and cannot be taken simultaneously. 
***General Electives (Courses level 000 to 299) 
****Composition or Writing Course (Courses under subject code ENGW) 
*****Minor Requirement (Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor) 
Type: 
B.A. 
Freshman Year First Semester 
*Mathematics Elective - MATH 005 or higher 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SCOM 102 
Intro: Comm. Prof. Dev. 
1 
SCOM 120 
Digital Media Literacy 
3 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
Mathematics Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
3 
PSYC 050 
Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Freshman Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SCOM 130 
Ethical Issues in Communication 
3 
SLMC 101 
Principles of Speech. 
3 
 
Freshman Composition 
3 
 
PHIL 051 or PHIL 055 
3 
 
Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 202 
Intro to Communication Theory. 
3 
SLMC 203 
Principles of Persuasion. 
3 
SLMC 250 
Intro to Leadership and Management Communication. 
3 
ARTE 080 
Computers in the Arts 
3 
ENGL 009 
Technical Writing, Pre-Professional 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Sophomore Year Second Semester 
*U.S. History Elective (Options: Courses under subject code HIST) 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 210 
Intro to Strategic Communication 
3 
SLMC 251 
Interpersonal Communication. 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
U.S. History Elective 
3 
 
Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
3 
 
Minor Requirement (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Junior Year First Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 301 
Intercultural/International Communication 
3 
SLMC 352 
Intro to Organizational Communication. 
3 
SOCI 001 
Introduction to Sociology 
3 
 
Humanities Elective 
3 
 
Minor Requirement (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
15 
Junior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 351 
Advanced Public Speaking. 
3 
 
Communication Elective 
3 
 
Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 
1 
 
Soc. Sci. Elect. or MGMT 301 
3 
 
Minor Requirement (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Minor Requirement (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
16 
Senior Year First Semester 
*ARTE 081 OR General Elective 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 405 
Practicum-Internship: Organizational Communication Management (OCM). 
1 
SLMC 490 
Communication Research Methods. 
3 
 
SLMC 431 or SLMC 451 
3 
ARTE 081 
Desktop Publishing 
3 
 
Minor Requirement (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
13 
Senior Year Second Semester 
Item # 
Title 
Credits 
SLMC 492 
Capstone: Senior Research Project 
3 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
SCOM 220 
Comm. Entrepreneurship (CERRC) 
1 
SLMC 325 
SLMC Co-curricular 
1 
 
Minor Requirement (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
3 
 
Social Science Elective 
3 
 
Sub-Total Credits 
14 
 
Total credits: 
120 
Category Descriptions 
Freshman Composition 
Courses under subject code ENGL and ENGW 

Mathematics Elective (Options: Courses under code MATH) 
 
MATH 006/007 
3 
- 
4 
MATH 009 
Introduction to Statistics 
4 
MATH 010 
College Algebra II 
4 
MATH 012 
Patterns in Mathematics 
3 
MATH 020 
Fundamental Concepts of Mathematics for Education I 
3 
MATH 026 
Applied Calculus 
4 
MATH 084-085 
Directed Readings in Honors for Sophomores 
1 
MATH 160 
Advanced Calculus for Science and Engineering 
3 
MATH 161, 162 
Seminar 
1 
- 
3 
MATH 164 
Introduction to Numerical Analysis 
3 
MATH 165, 166 
Directed Readings. 
1 
- 
3 
MATH 168 
Actuarial Science Laboratory I 
1 
MATH 169 
Actuarial Science Laboratory II 
1 
MATH 190 
Probability and Statistics II 
3 
MATH 191 
Foundations of Applied Mathematics 
3 
MATH 192 
Topics in Applied Mathematics 
3 
MATH 193 
Actuarial Science Seminar 
3 
MATH 196 
Introduction to Analysis II 
3 
MATH 197 
Introduction to Modern Algebra I 
3 
MATH 198 
Introduction to Modern Algebra II 
3 

Foreign Language * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
 
Foreign Language - Amharic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Arabic* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Chinese* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - French* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - German 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Haitian Creole* (Options: Courses under code HACR) 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Spanish* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Swahili* 
3 
 
Foreign Language - Wolof* 
3 

PHIL 051 or PHIL 055 
Choose between PHIL 051: Principles of Reasoning (3crs) or PHIL 055: Introduction to Philosophy (3crs). 

Physical Education Elective (options: courses under subject code HHPL) 

U.S. History Elective 
Courses under subject code HIST 

Afro-American Studies Elective * (Options: see Elective Group Descriptions) 
ENGL 054 
African American Literature to 1940 
3 
ENGL 055 
African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
3 
AFRO 005 
Introduction to Africana Studies I 
3 
AFRO 006 
Introduction to Africana Studies II 
3 
HIST 005 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
3 
HIST 006 
Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
3 
AFST 101 
Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
3 
FASH 102 
African American Dress 
3 
POLS 006 
Pan-Africanism 
3 
MUTP 100 
Blacks in the Arts 
3 

Minor Requirement (Options: To be determined in consultation with advisor) 
Courses level 000 to 299 in identified subject for Minor 

Humanities Elective 

Communication Elective 

Soc. Sci. Elect. or MGMT 301 
Choose between a Soc. Sci. Elective (Courses under Divisional Studies B) (3crs) or MGMT 301: Management and Organizational Behavior (formerly Principles of Management) (3crs). 

SLMC 431 or SLMC 451 
Choose between SLMC 431: Conflict Management and Negotiation (3crs) or SLMC 451: Intro to Training and Development (3crs). 

Social Science Elective 


Course Descriptions 
Army 
MILI 
MILI 001: 002, 003, 004. MS 101L, 102L, 201L and 202L Leadership Laboratory 
 Open only to (and required of) students in the associate Military Science course. Series, with different roles for students at different levels in the program. Learn and practice basic skills. Gain insight into Advanced Course in order to make an informed decision whether to apply for it. Build self-confidence and a team-building leadership skills that can be applied through life. Physical is required in MS 101, MS 102 and 202. Series, with different roles for students at different levels in the program. Participate in a learn to lead a physical fitness program. Emphasis on the development of an individual fitness program and the role of exercise and fitness in one’s life. 
Credits: 
1 

MILI 005, 006, 007, 008. MS 301L, 302L, 401L: Advanced Course Leadership Laboratories 
Open only to students in the associated Military Science course. Series, with different roles for students at different levels in the program. Involves leadership responsibilities for the planning, coordination, executing and evaluation of various training and activities with Basic Course students and for the ROTC program as whole. Students develop, practice and refine leadership skills by serving and being evaluated in a variety of responsible positions. Physical fitness is required of students in MS 301, 302, 401 and 402, of which this program is an integral part. Series, with different roles for students at different levels in the program. Participate in and learn to plan and lead physical fitness programs. Develops the physical fitness required of an officer in the Army. Emphasis on the development of an individual fitness program and the role of exercise and fitness in one’s life. 
Credits: 
1 

MILI 101: Introduction to ROTC (and to the University) 
 Make your first new peer group at college one committed to performing well and enjoying the experience. Increase self-confidence through team study and activities in basic drill, physical fitness, rappelling, leadership reaction course, first aid, making presentations and basic marksmanship. Learn fundamental concepts of leadership in a profession in both classroom and outdoor laboratory environments. One hour and a required leadership lab, MS101L, plus optional participation in a one hour session for physical fitness. Participation in a weekend exercise is optional, but highly encouraged (and fun!). 
Credits: 
1 

MILI 102: MS 101 Introduction to Leadership 
 Learn/apply principles of effective leading. Reinforce self-confidence through participation in physically and mentally challenging exercises with upper division ROTC students. Develop communication skills to improve individual performance and group interaction. Relate organizational ethical values to the effectiveness of a leader. One hour and a required leadership lab, MS102L, plus optional participation in a one hour session for physical fitness. Participation in a weekend exercise is optional, but highly encouraged. 
Credits: 
1 

MILI 201: MS 102 Self/Team Development 
Learn/apply ethics-based leadership skills that develop individual abilities and contribute to the building of effective teams of people. Develop skills in oral presentations, writing concisely, planning of events, coordination of group efforts, advanced first aid, land navigation and basic military tactics. Learn fundamentals of ROTC’s Leadership Assessment Program. Two hours and a required leadership lab, MS201L, plus required participation in two one-hour sessions for physical fitness. Participation in a weekend exercise is optional, but highly encouraged. 
Credits: 
2 

MILI 202: MS 202 Individual/Team Military Tactics 
Introduction to individual and team aspects of military tactics in small unit operations. Includes use of radio communications making safety assessments, movement techniques, planning for team safety/security and methods of pre-execution checks. Practical exercises with upper division ROTC students. Learn techniques for training others as an aspect of continued leadership development. Two hours and a required leadership lab, MS202L, plus required participation in two one-hour sessions for physical fitness. Participation in exercise is optional, but highly encouraged. 
Credits: 
2 

MILI 301: MS 301 Leading Small Organizations I 
Series of practical opportunities to lead small groups, receive personal assessments and encouragement, and lead again in situations of increasing complexity. Uses small unit defensive tactics and opportunities to plan and conduct training for lower division students both to develop such skills and as vehicles for practicing leading. Three hours and a required leadership lab, MS301L, plus required participation in three one-hour sessions for physical fitness. Participation in one weekend exercise is also required, and one or two more weekend exercises may be offered for optional participation. 
Credits: 
3 

MILI 302: MS 302 Leading Small Organizations II 
Continues methodology of MS 301. Analyze tasks; prepare written or oral guidance for team members to accomplish tasks. Delegate tasks and supervise. Plan for and adapt to the unexpected in organizations under stress. Examine and apply lessons from leadership case studies. Examine importance of ethical decision making in setting a positive climate that enhances team performance. Three hours and a required leadership lab, MS302L, plus required participation in three one-hour sessions for physical fitness. Participation in one weekend exercise is required; two other weekend exercises optional. 
Credits: 
3 

MILI 401: Leadership Challenges and Goal-Setting 
Plan, conduct and evaluate activities of the ROTC cadet organization Articulate goals, put plans into action to attain them. Assess organizational cohesion and develop strategies to improve it. Develop confidence in skills to lead people and manage resources. Learn/apply various Army policies and programs in this effort. Three hours and a required leadership lab, MS401L, plus required participation in three one-hour sessions for physical fitness. Participation in one weekend exercise is also required, and one or two more weekend exercises may be offered for optional participation. 
Credits: 
3 

MILI 402: MS 402 Transition to Lieutenant 
Continues the methodology from MS 401. Identify and resolve ethical dilemmas. Refine counseling and motivating techniques. Examine aspects of tradition and law as it relates to leading as an officer in the Army. Prepare for a future as a successful Army lieutenant. Three hours and a required leadership lab, MS402L, plus required participation in three one-hour sessions for physical fitness. Participation in one weekend exercise is also required, and one or two more weekend exercises may be offered for optional participation. 
Credits: 
3 

Aerospace 
AERO 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
AERO 001, 002, 003, 009: LLAB – Leadership Laboratory 
(Pass/Fail) .An integrated grouping of leadership developmental activities designed to meet the needs and expectations of prospective Air Force second lieutenants and complement the AFROTC academic program. It is a student planned, organized and executed practicum. LLAB is a weekly laboratory that touches on the topics of Air Force customs and courtesies, health and physical fitness, field training preparation and drill and ceremonies. In addition to the weekly laboratory, students are required to participate in one hour physical training sessions two days per week. 
Credits: 
1 

AERO 011: AS 100 - The Air Force Today I 
Explores the mission and organizational structure of the United States Air Force. Introduces the student to Reserve Officer Training Corps by examining air power, customs and courtesies, officership, and core values. Examines Air Force opportunities, benefits, career choices, and installations which provides information needed to determine whether or not to pursue a career as an Air Force officer. An introduction to effective communication is included. Effective From: Spring 2006 
Credits: 
1 

AERO 012: AS 100- The Air Force Today II 
.Prerequisite: None. A continuation of Air Force Today I. Continues with the mission and organizational structure of the Air Force. A macro view of U.S. military history is introduced with emphasis on U.S. air power. Air Force communications is developed with emphasis on interpersonal communications, oral communications, and written communications. Effective From: Spring 2006 
Credits: 
1 

AERO 021: AS 200 – The Air Force Way I 
.Prerequisite: None. Examines the development of air power from its earliest beginnings to the present, including in-depth examination of World War I, World War II, and Korean Conflict. Effective From: Spring 2006 
Credits: 
1 

AERO 022: AS 200 – The Air Force Way II 
.Prerequisite: None. A continuation of Air Force Way I focusing on the Vietnam War, Cold War, Gulf War, the Global War on Terrorism. Emphasizes the concepts and skills required by the Air Force officer including oral communications, Air Force quality, leadership, followership, ethics, and values. Effective From: Spring 2006 
Credits: 
1 

AERO 131: AS 300 – Air Force Leadership Studies I 
.Prerequisite: None. Emphasizes the concepts and skills required by the successful management and leader. Curriculum includes individual motivational and behavioral processes, leadership, communication, and group dynamics, providing the foundation for developing the junior officer's professional skills. Course material stresses decision making, and the use of analytic aids in planning, organizing, and controlling in a changing environment. Develops communication skills through writing and speaking exercises. Effective From: Spring 2006 
Credits: 
3 

AERO 132: AS 300 – Air Force Leadership Studies II 
.Prerequisite: None. A continuation of Air Force Leadership Studies II. Organizational and personal ethics, management of change, organizational power, politics, and managerial strategy are discussed within the context of the military. Actual Air Force case studies are used throughout the course. Effective From: Spring 2006 
Credits: 
3 

AERO 141: AS 400 - National Security Affairs and Preparation for Active Duty I 
.Prerequisite: None. Focuses on the U.S. Armed Forces as an integral element of American society. This course examines a wide variety of topics concerning American civil and military relations and the environment in which U.S. defense policy is formulated. Specific topics include the role of the professional officer in a democratic society, socialization processes within the American military forces, and the requisites for maintaining adequate national security forces. A special emphasis is placed on further refining the student's communications skills in the context of the course material. 
Credits: 
3 

AERO 142: AS 400 – National Security Affairs and Preparation for Active Duty II 
.Prerequisite: None. Continuation of National Security Affairs and Preparation for Active Duty I. Focuses on the role of the Air Force officer while on active duty. Includes responsibilities as an officer, commander, leader, and a manager. Topics include a review of military law, nonjudicial punishment, role of the staff judge advocate, laws of armed conflict, military ethics, officer professional development, an officer's social responsibilities, fraternization, personal finances, staff work, and Air Force base services and activities. Concludes with a review of the Air Force Core Values. Effective: Spring 2006 
Credits: 
3 

African Studies 
http://www.coas.howard.edu/africanstudies/ 
The Department of African Studies (DAS) provides an opportunity for Howard students to acquire an objective view of the present position of Africa in the modern (and changing) world, as well as an understanding of Africa's economic, social, and political problems. The department has adopted an interdisciplinary approach to the study of Africa at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. At the undergraduate level, the department educates students who wish to continue their studies in African affairs or are preparing to work in this field. 
The DAS offers the only undergraduate major in African Studies in the United States. Students graduating from the department typically go on to undertake further study and professional careers in African and international affairs as well as obtain employment in fields such as teaching, law, social work, communications, business, non-governmental and governmental organizations. 
The mission of the DAS at the undergraduate level is to provide an opportunity for Howard students to acquire, through interdisciplinary study, a comprehensive understanding of Africa’s role and relations in the contemporary world. The department has specialists representing many disciplines who expose students to an integrated approach to studying a range of African political, historical, economic, social and cultural issues and to the critical skills for analyzing and addressing Africa’s challenges. 
The Department of African Studies encourages students to seek and take advantage of internship opportunities available in the Washington, DC metropolitan area and elsewhere nationally and internationally. The Director of Undergraduate Studies as well as the Chairperson and other faculty members of the department assist students in identifying and obtaining such internships that provide practical experiences in professional and community service settings. 
Students doing internships register for AFST 183 or AFST 195: Internship in African Studies and prepare a research paper or work on other projects approved by the professor and/or the internship director. Only African Studies majors with senior standing can gain academic credit for internship. 
AFST 101: Introduction to Contemporary Africa 
A general introduction to contemporary Africa, its people, and their relations with people in other parts of the world. The course includes a survey of important political, economic and social issues shaping the African continent. 
Credits: 
3 

AFST 102: Science, Technology, and African Development 
A general survey course designed to examine Africans contributions to science and technology and contemporary needs in science and technology for development. 
Credits: 
3 

AFST 103: Freedom Struggles: Southern Africa 
An examination of the history, dynamics and contemporary relevance of liberation struggles and their aftermath in Southern Africa as a whole. 
Credits: 
3 

AFST 104: Islam, Youth and Social Change in Africa 
An examination of various models of social transformation as enacted primarily by Muslim youth throughout Africa and the Diaspora. 
Credits: 
3 

AFST 105: African Languages and Cultures 
A survey of African languages and their classification. Characteristics of the language families of Africa will be described and the relation of language to conceptual systems and logic will be analyzed. Prerequisite: AFST 001, or consent of the instructor. 
Credits: 
3 

AFST 106: Social Media and the African World 
A general introduction to the scope, basic concepts, and methods of African Studies and a survey of the history, major themes, and current trends of the field. Prerequisite: AFST 101 or equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 

AFST 107: Social Media and the African World 
An examination of the connections between the youth, education, revolutions in technology and transformations in politics and society at the individual, national and global levels. 
Credits: 
3 

AFST 110: African Development and Underdevelopment 
An interdisciplinary approach to the study of African development problems, based on an integration of economic, historical, socio-cultural, political and philosophical perspectives. Prereq. AFST 101 
Credits: 
3 

AFST 111: African Systems of Thought 
An introduction to the nature, and variety of African religious, political, social and cultural systems of thought, with emphasis on the connections among them, their impact on African definitions, problems, and their interactions with emerging formations such as African feminism. Prerequisite: AFST 101 or equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 

AFST 121: Environment and Society in Africa 
A general survey of Africa’s conditions and their effects on societal efforts to overcome poverty. Prerequisite: AFST 101 or equivalent. 
Credits: 
4 

AFST 123: Women in African Civilizations and Traditions 
An exploration of the different dimensions of the historical and contemporary roles of women in African societies. 
Credits: 
3 

AFST 124: Globalization in Africa 
An examination of the nature and evolution of globalization in Africa, including studies of interdependencies, new regionalism, and climate change. 
Credits: 
3 

AFST 125: China and Africa 
A study of historical and contemporary relationships and ties between China and Africa. 
Credits: 
3 

AFST 126: AIDS in Africa and the African Diaspora 
An examination of AIDS in Africa and the African Diaspora, with a focus on the impact of race, gender, class and sexuality on the distributional spread of the disease and societal and global responses to the disease. 
Credits: 
3 

AFST 131: African Cultural Formation and Identities 
A comparative examination of emerging and changing patterns of culture and definitions of identity in urban Africa and in selected communities outside Africa. Prerequisite: AFST 101 or equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 

AFST 133: Cont. & Regional Organizations 
This course examines the origins, design, and effects of international organizations. International organizations covered in the course include the African Union, United Nations, World Trade Organization, International Monetary Fund, World Bank, and International Criminal Court. We will also examine regional organizations. 
Credits: 
3 

AFST 156: Introduction to African Literature 
A general introduction to the oral and written literatures of Africa, with emphasis on their formal and aesthetic properties and their sociopolitical and cultural significance for contemporary African societies. Prerequisite: AFST 101. 
Credits: 
3 

AFST 157: Literature, Film and Society in Africa 
An examination of the modes and dynamics of interaction between literature, oral and written, and film, and the social, political, and cultural significance of these media of creative and intellectual expression in contemporary African societies. Prerequisite: AFST 101; AFST 156. 
Credits: 
3 

AFST 182: Seminar in Regional Studies 
A research seminar on specific socioeconomic and political issues of a selected African region, designed to introduce students to the methodology of regional studies and to increase their familiarity with a given region of the continent. Prerequisite: AFST 101, or equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 

AFST 183: Internship in African Studies 
This course offers students an opportunity to apply their knowledge of Africa by serving one semester internships with public or private organizations conducting African related work. Prerequisite: AFST 101 
Credits: 
3 

AFST 184: Directed Research 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
3 

AFST 191: Senior Colloquium 
A seminar on selected themes and topics in African Studies designed to highlight the interdisciplinary focus of the field and to prepare students for the senior comprehensive examination. Prerequisite: AFST 101, AFST 102, or senior status. 
Credits: 
3 

AFST 195: Internship in African Studies 
This course offers students the opportunity to apply their knowledge of Africa by serving one semester internships with public or private organizations conducting African related work. Prerequisite: AFST 101. 
Credits: 
3 

Afro-American Studies 
AFRO 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
AFRO 005: Introduction to Africana Studies I 
Introduction to the Afro-American Studies (African American, Africana, Black Studies) field and survey of factors which helped create the Afro-American experience in the Western Hemisphere. Satisfies university-wide African American cluster requirement and Divisional Studies a requirement for non-majors and non-minors. 
Credits: 
3 

AFRO 006: Introduction to Africana Studies II 
Systemic and structural exploration of issues involving the African American domestic (family), religious, educational and political institutions as they have been impacted by the larger society. Satisfies University-wide African American cluster requirement and Divisional Studies A requirement for non-majors and non-minors. 
Credits: 
3 

AFRO 085: Sophomore Directed Readings - Honors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. Permission Required. 

AFRO 089: Junior Directed Readings - Honors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. Permission Required. 
Credits: 
3 

AFRO 093: Senior Directed Readings - Honors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. Permission Required. 
Credits: 
3 

AFRO 101: Commerical Exploitation of the Third World 
(Sophomore Standing or Above. Interdisciplinary Course) Attention Given to the economics of colonial, neocolonial, imperialistic, and nationalistic social formations and movements in the “Third World.” Examination of the political and economic forces that influenced the 19th and 20th-century experience of persons of color beyond the USA. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore standing. 

AFRO 103: Programs for Black Economic Development 
Analysis of the economic empowerment strategies and philosophies of Afro-American leaders and organizations, from the early 19th century to the present. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore standing. 

AFRO 115: Seminar on Teaching Black Studies 
Analyzes the background of evolution and organization of the emergent field of African American or Black Studies in the context of American higher education. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore standing. 

AFRO 121: Special Topics in Black Studies 
This course is an in-depth study of selected issues in the African and African American experience. Emphasis is placed on the dominant and contemporary political, economic and socio-cultural dimensions of this experience. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore standing. 

AFRO 122: Education in Black America 
This course is a critical review and analysis of the historical and contemporary educational philosophies expressed by educators who are directly or indirectly involved in the processes of Afro-American education. 
Credits: 
3 

AFRO 131: Black Philosophy, Religion and Ritual 
This course examines the ways blacks in Africa and the Americas conceptualize and explain their world through philosophy and religion. Various cultural and religious belief systems are examined, including traditional African religion and U.S. urban religions, voodoo, etc. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore standing. (This course satisfies the Divisional Studies C requirement.) 

AFRO 132: Politics of Black Autobiography 
This course is an examination of black autobiography from William Wells Brown to Colin Powell with emphasis on the ideological purposes served by this literature. Attention is given to the political influence of each writer in developing black philosophical frameworks in specific historical eras. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior standing. 

AFRO 133: Nineteenth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
This course examines the relationship between social and political thought, black institutions and ideologies within the context of the struggle against slavery, segregation, racial discrimination, and economic control between l787 and l895. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore standing. (This course satisfies the Divisional Studies C requirement.) 

AFRO 134: Twentieth Century Black Social and Political Thought 
This course is an analysis of the social and political thought of black intellectual spokespersons as manifested in the critical stages of black reactions to problems of social justice from l895 to the present. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore standing. 

AFRO 159: Senior Seminar 
This course is for majors in Afro American Studies only. Key theories, approaches, and empirical studies in the Afro-American Studies discipline are reviewed in preparation for the departmental comprehensive examination. A research paper is required of all students. All departmental faculty participate in the course. 
Credits: 
3 

AFRO 163: Black Experience in the Caribbean 
This course is a detailed historical analysis of the African experience in the Caribbean Basin from the 16th century to the present. Political, sociological, economic and cultural issues in the Caribbean are explored. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior standing. 

AFRO 165: Black Women in America 
Analysis of the historical involvement of black. women in American institutions: education, religion, politics and social reconstruction. Charts linkages of black women in Africa and the Caribbean and North America. 
Credits: 
3 

AFRO 170: Directed Research 
This course is open to Afro-American Studies majors only. Individual research projects are conducted on the Afro-American experience, under the supervision of a departmental faculty member. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior standing and advance faculty approval are required. 

AFRO 175: Preparation for Practicum Writing Research 
This course focuses on developing the student's skills in writing up research findings and reports under the supervision of a faculty member.   
Credits: 
3 

AFRO 176: Practicum/Internship in Afro American Studies 
Required of all majors, this component of the field work program affords students opportunities to merge theory with practical aspects of their chosen areas of concentration by interning for one semester with selected organizations outside of the University. 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
AFRO 175 or AFRO 775, senior standing, majors only. 

AFRO 191: Comparative Slavery: An Introduction 
Survey of various systems of bondage in Europe proper, the Near East, Africa and the Americas. Emphasis is placed on the economic, social and cultural factors, which contributed to the rise and decline of slavery throughout the world. 
Credits: 
3 

AFRO 192: The Harlem Renaissance 
This course reviews the Harlem Renaissance Movement from 1910 to 1945, the first era in Afro-American literary and social history in which black writers emerged as distinct political voices in the arts. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore standing. 

AFRO 193: Literature and Politics of the Caribbean 
This course is a sociological examination of the ideologies, themes and concerns expressed by Caribbean writers, with particular reference to the socio-political context in which their literature was produced. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore standing. 

AFRO 195: Comparative Black Literature I 
This course is a survey of the creative literature of black writers in the U.S., the Caribbean, and Africa, with critical attention given to the social and cultural environments from which they emerged. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore standing. 

AFRO 196: Comparative Black Literature II 
This course examines the relationship between the creative literature of black authors in the U.S., the Caribbean, and Africa and their socio-political life as reflected in drama, novels, poetry, essays. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore standing. 

AFRO 197: Black Thought in the Diaspora 
This course is an examination of the cultural, historical, and political origins of Pan-Africanism and other black systems of thought. Topics for analysis include ideologies of early black political and social organizations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior standing. 

AFRO 198: Contemporary Black Poetry 
This is a survey of Black American poetry from the mid 1960s to the present. Attention is given to the folk and cultural basis of poetry with special emphasis on the place of poetry in the Black Arts Movement of the 1960s and early 1970s. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore standing. 

AFRO 199: Black Aesthetics 
This course examines the artistic ideas and values found in Africa and traces their reappearance and transformation in the religions and philosophies of African-American cultural life. The aesthetics of the plastic, visual and performance arts are explored. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior standing. 

AFRO 775: Preparation for Practicum 
This course examines research methods with emphasis on the steps required to design a scientific study including archival and survey data collection techniques, e.g., document analysis, participant observation, survey design and field interview techniques. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior standing, majors only. 

Art 
As the visual arts component of the most comprehensive predominantly black university in the world, the Department of Art recognizes its unique responsibility to reflect, affirm and perpetuate the visual expression of the black experience. The department seeks to continuously create and maintain an atmosphere conducive to developing skilled and professionally mature artists, designers and art historians. Emphasis is placed upon instruction from a multicultural perspective and recognition of the dynamic reciprocity of art and life in the preparation of students for careers in the visual arts. The Howard University Art Department is an accredited institutional member of the National Association of Schools of Art and Design. 
Undergraduate Admission Requirements 
In addition to the University’s admission requirements, applicants to the B.F.A. degree programs must submit a portfolio of artwork to the Department of Art. Program areas that traditionally required slides will now require digital images instead of slides. A portfolio of 12-15 digital images of original creative works (with no more than 2-3 views of any one work), must be prepared and presented on a CD Rom or flash drive (URL’s are also acceptable if the work is presented online in quality form). Each image must be clearly labeled with the title of the work, materials or media of creation, size, and date of creation. These original creative works must be prepared according to the guidelines: 
1. 
Static Two-Dimensional imagery: JPEG Format in a Powerpoint Presentations Slideshow (.ppt or .pps); 

2. 
Three-Dimension Pieces (i.e. sculpture, ceramics, fashion, 3D modeling): JPEG Format including 2-3 views of the work; 

3. 
Motion graphics and video: Use MP4 Format along with pixel dimensions; 

4. 
Size of digital images: no less than 800 x 600 ppi 

5. 
Please include with each slide of your presentation: . 
Title of the work 

. 
Materials or media used to create the work 

. 
Size of actual piece of work represented by the digital images. Size of work should be relative to the media with which it was created (for traditional media, use inches; for static digital media, use pixel dimensions; and for motion graphics and video use pixel dimensions and time in minutes and seconds) 

. 
Date of creation 




6. 
Physical portfolios are still being accepted. 


Mail portfolios to: 
Department of Art Division of Fine Arts College of Arts and Sciences Howard University 2455 Sixth Street, NW Washington, DC 20059 
Special Degree Requirements 
Students seeking degrees offered by the Art Department must complete core courses in the Foundation Program upon which concentration courses are built. A student must complete 18 to 21 credits in the Department of Art, with the approval of a faculty advisor, in order to obtain a minor. In selecting electives, students may choose within the following guidelines: 
• 
University electives in humanities – any courses in the humanities area (literature, drama, music, classics, English) for which the student can qualify; 

• 
Art electives– any courses in the practice or history of art; fashion merchandising or interior design; 

• 
Studio electives– any courses in the practice of art or design for which the student qualifies. 


Art History 
In addition to providing students with a broad understanding of world art, the Art History program focuses upon African American art and the art of the African Diaspora. In beginning and advanced courses and seminars, students are encouraged to engage in scholarly investigation and analysis of visual styles, cultural movements, and social evidence in the history of art, especially original scholarship in African American and African Art History. The program’s strong research focus provides a virtual road map for students who wish to pursue careers as art historians in academia or in museums as curators and educators. 
 
Ceramics 
The Ceramics Program provides students with a technical foundation in basic hand and wheel formation, glaze calculation, clay formulation, and a range of finishing and firing techniques. Advanced students are encouraged to explore the full range of possibilities in clay. The ceramics unit is designed to train students to become the traditional production potter; the ceramic sculptor and the visionary artists who want to combine and experiment with state of the arts ceramic materials and technology to create their visual voice. 
 
Design 
The goal of the Howard University Design Program is to develop an immense range of knowledge, skills and competencies in the area of visual communication through cross-curricular experiences. This is achieved through the study of theory and the practical application of learned techniques. This program reacquaints the student artist with foundation principles that are central to design. Through an intensive curriculum in visual and technologically-mediated communication students will learn how to identify, research, analyze, and solve problems at various levels, providing multiple solutions, mechanicals and prototypes. Students will also develop the ability to produce the following visual forms as solutions to studio and related real life problems: 
• 
two-dimensional 

• 
three-dimensional 

• 
printed 

• 
digital 

• 
motion 

• 
interactive 


Ideally, this program will cultivate competency in problem solving abilities, proficiency in conceptual skills and mastery of craftsmanship within each graduate. 
Electronic Studio 
The Electronic Studio program is designed for students preparing for careers as web designers, two- and three-dimensional animators, special effect artists for TV and Film, product design, and motion graphics. The curriculum combines the fundamentals of visual arts: drawing, painting, illustration, and two-dimensional and three-dimensional design. Photography and video, with intensive applied computer technology and software techniques as applied to visual communications and design. Course work is designed to incorporate prerequisite visual arts courses to prepare students to be competitive in the visual arts and computer-aided art and design fields. 
Painting 
The Painting program is designed to introduce students to traditional and contemporary painting techniques with an emphasis on the control of paint and the painted form. In the intermediate and advanced level courses, students are encouraged to experiment with various media and thematic approaches. 
Photography 
The Photography program provides students with skills, techniques, and principals of conventional darkroom practices, which form the framework for digital imaging in advance courses. Color photography, taught in combination with Photoshop, adds another dimension to creative control and expression along with multi-media applications. Advance courses in Studio Lighting, Alternative Processes, and Independent Study, are designed to allow the student to produce portfolios from collective experiences and photographic knowledge. 
The photography program embraces modern technologies while enforcing the principles of light, color and image capture for print and the Web. We ground the student in the fundamentals of basic darkroom techniques with black and white film and chemistry in producing a finished print. Other courses challenge your approach to thematic concepts where you express ideas illustrated through the images you produce. Through digital applications you’ll learn about basic color theory, characteristics and behaviors and how color impacts the image. The program rounds out with studio lighting, alternative processes and multimedia production giving the student necessary skill sets and collaborative working environments reflecting the current trends of the global market. 
Printmaking and Sculpture 
The Sculpture program provides students with a variety of sculpting experiences. The program offers courses in figure and character modeling, welded and forged steel fabrication, multi-media assemblage, wood and stone carving, woodworking, cement, and mold making and casting. B.F.A. candidates may specialize in one or a combination of areas depending on their personal direction and career path. Graduate and undergraduate students work side-by-side in a 5600 sq. ft. studio facility which houses three shop areas, graduate studios, an outside gated work area, and a 3D modeling computer lab. 
 
 
 
ARTA 011: Painting I 
Credits: 
3 

ARTD 114: Illustration 
The philosophies of twentieth and twenty-first century leaders in design provide a platform for the exploration of the merging of the aesthetics of graphic design with contemporary illustration practice.  Projects are geared toward contemporary and innovative work able to address both traditional and emerging markets 
Credits: 
3 

ARTD 125: Creative Business: Industry Prep. and Entrepreneurship 
The course provides a foundation for the financial planning and management of a new venture start-up and acquisition 
Credits: 
3 

ARTD 126: Web. Dev. & Interactive Media 
Provides a background in web design and interactive media 
Credits: 
3 

ARTD 198: Digital Asset Management 
In this course, you will select and use an image management system to organize, edit, and share your photographs. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 089: Three Dimensional Concepts I 
Credits: 
3 

ARTP 063: Digital Darkroom 
Discover how to create your own masterpieces, in color or black and white, without the use of a darkroom. Learn how to scan original films or prints, download files from a digital camera or CD, and optimize files to ready them for photo-quality printing or web use. 
Credits: 
3 

Art History 
ARTH 
ARTH 161: Art Appreciation 
Introduction to the elements and dimensions of art and the philosophical, political, and psychological evolution of various cultures. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTH 162: Introduction to African Art History 
An overview of the history, aesthetics, process and function of the visual arts of Africa from the prehistoric period to traditional societies of today. Emphasis is placed on the interrelationship between the visual arts and religion, music, dance and other components of the African culture. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTH 164: Survey of Visual Art 
Study of the visual arts from prehistoric times to the end of the twelfth century. Fall semester only. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTH 165: Introduction to Art History 
Continuation of ARTH 164 from the thirteenth century to the present. Spring semester only. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTH 164. 

ARTH 167: Topics in Art Criticism 
The nature of interpretation and evaluation in the visual arts, with emphasis placed upon artistic expression in the African Diaspora. May be repeated for up to 6 hours of credit. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTH 168: Internship in Art History 
On-site professional experience in a museum, gallery or cultural agency. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTH 170: Modern Art History I 
Examines nineteenth century European and American styles of painting, printmaking, sculpture and architecture. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTH 171: Modern Art History II 
Examines twentieth century European and American styles of painting, printmaking, sculpture and architecture. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTH 172: West African Art 
Study of the visual arts of African civilization. Focus is placed on the artistic achievements of such civilizations as Ghana, Mali, Songhai, Nok, Igbo Ukwu, Benin, and Owo, among others, and the art of more recent cultural groups. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTH 173: African Art History III 
An in-depth study of the history, aesthetics, processes and functions of the visual arts in ancient African civilizations in the Nile Valley and the Rift Valley. Focus will be placed on the artistic achievements of such civilizations as Egypt, Nubia, Aksum, Meore, Zimbabwe and of others since medieval times. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTH 178: African-American Art I 
Analyzes the elements and dimensions of art produced by persons of African descent in the United States from precolonial times to 1945. Fall semester only. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTH 179: African-American Art II 
Continuation of ARTH 178 from 1950 to the present. Spring semester only. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTH 181: Research in Art History I 
Treats research methodology and its application to the study of various cultures, and independent study with faculty supervision. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTH 182: Research in Art History II 
Continuation of ARTH 181. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTH 181 

ARTH 183: The Expressionist Image 
A study of style and content from German Expressionism (1905 - 1920s) through and beyond. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTH 188: Survey of African Art 
This course is a survey of the indigenous arts of Africa.  Sacred and secular art forms and how they reflect the native culture will be explored in this course. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTH 189: Trends, Directions, Ideas in African American Art 
This course seeks to introduce students to problems in art historiography and art criticism and to explore the issues of identity and culture through examination of the Harlem Renaissance and contemporary developments in African American Art. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTH 196: Heritage: The Art of Romare Bearden 
An examination of the work of Romare Bearden. 
Credits: 
3 

Art Management 
ARTM 
ARTM 084: Art Process 
An introduction to the study of art and basic art processes. The course is designed to help students to understand art and art-making through lectures, discussions, critiques and limited studio work. It is especially an asset to those students who seek guidance in preparing entry-level portfolios to pursue a major in art. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTM 155: Independent Study in Art Management 
Individual and independent self-directed study. Preliminary proposal submitted to the program coordinator for approval. The student presents a written report concerning a particular area of art management. Spring semester only 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Senior status. 

ARTM 156: Art Management Internship 
On-site entry-level work experience in visual arts organizations in the Washington Metropolitan area. Each student should meet with the program coordinator and make arrangements for placement. One or more members of the cooperating visual arts organization’s management staff will supervise the intern. An intern job performance appraisal is provided by the intern site supervisor. Fall semester only. 
Credits: 
4 

ARTM 157: Art Management Internship 
A continuation of ARTM 156. Spring semester only. 
Credits: 
3 
- 
4 

ARTM 158: Art Management Internship 
A continuation of ARTM 157 but site not restricted to the Washington metropolitan area. Prior intern site approval required. Summer session only. 
Credits: 
3 
- 
4 

ARTM 159: Fine Arts Valuation 
Special problems in determining valuation of works of art. Investigation of techniques and modalities of marketing of art worldwide and its impact on national and international culture groups.. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTM 160: The Business of Art 
Special problems. May be repeated for a total of 6 semester hours. 
Credits: 
3 

Ceramics 
ARTC 
ARTC 121: Ceramics I 
An introduction to clay through the use of hand building fabricating techniques. Historical, African and simple contemporary ceramics orientation, investigating clay bodies and glazes. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTC 122: Ceramics II 
An introduction to throwing. Fabrication of clay forms using the pottery wheel. A continuation of glaze calculation, hands-on firing techniques. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTC 123: Ceramics III 
Concentration on advanced wheel forms, production and glazes. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTC 124: Ceramics IV 
Expansion of firing experiences to accommodate individual student requirements to produce ceramic projects. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTC 125: Ceramics V 
An exploration of glaze materials by fired tests. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTC 126: Ceramics VI 
A continued, in-depth exploration of glazes and their effects through firing. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTC 127: Ceramics VIII 
Technical development of ceramics in sculptural structures for art in public places. 
Credits: 
3 
- 
0 

ARTC 128: Ceramics VIII 
Technical development of ceramics in sculptural structures for art in public places. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTC 129: Ceramics IX 
Independent study/ apprenticeship/internship study that exposes the student to varied processes of ceramic arts. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTC 130: Ceramics X 
Advanced Ceramic Workshop exposing students to advanced processes of ceramic arts. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTC 129. Favorable evaluation required. Majors/minors only. 

ARTC 131: Glaze Calculation and Formation 
This class is offered to provide art students with the basic concepts of technical ceramics and familiarity with ceramic materials and basic body and glaze calculations and formation. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTC 137: Ceramic Sculpture workshop 
For students who have demonstrated a desire and capability to handle the medium in totally three-dimensional form. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor. 

ARTC 138: Ceramics Sculpture 
Clay handled three-dimensionally or in relief format. 
Credits: 
3 

Design 
ARTD 
ARTD 103: Design History 
A survey of the impact of technology on the visual qualities of graphic, advertising, fashion, architecture, and industrial design from the Victorian Arts and Crafts Movement to the computer age. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTD 104: Intro to Digital Design 
Continuation of ARTD 103. A survey of the impact of technology on the visual qualities of graphic, advertising, fashion, architecture, and industrial design from the Victorian Arts and Crafts Movement to the computer age. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTD 105: Typography I 
History, design, and execution of fundamental lettering and typeforms, with emphasis on structure; includes practices in type rendering and built-up letters. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTD 104. 

ARTD 106: Design for Advertising I 
Treats the aesthetics and techniques of advertising layout, advanced problems in illustration, advertising art, magazine covers, and display. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTD 105. 

ARTD 107: Design for Advertising II 
Involves studio design problems, with emphasis on the development of ideas and the ability to communicate them effectively. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTD 106. 

ARTD 108: Typography II 
Deals with procedures in type specification and mechanical printing methods. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTD 107. 

ARTD 109: Reproduction and Techniques 
Teaches techniques of preparing work for reproduction, with concentration on color separation for a four-color process. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTD 108. 

ARTD 110: Studio Problems in Design 
Development of graphic and verbal articulation in package design and display, with study of agency practice and communication design. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTD 111: Illustration 
Analysis of principles of illustration, with emphasis on theories of commercial and fine art illustration. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTR 004. 

ARTD 112: Production and Portfolio Techniques I 
Covers production and presentation of designer’s work from drawing board to the printed page. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTD 107. 

ARTD 113: Production and Portfolio Techniques II 
Continuation of ARTD 112. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTD 112. 

ARTD 115: Digital Design I 
This course is designed to develop basic entry-level skills required for careers in the digital publishing industry. The content includes computer skills; digital publishing concepts and operations; layout, design, measurement activities; and digital imaging as well as communication, collaboration and decision-making activities; critical thinking; and problem solving. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTD 116: History of Design II 
Upon successful completion of the History of Design course, you will be able to: Identify how design is affected by its cultural and historical context Identify and discuss key figures, events and trends in the history of design 
Credits: 
3 

ARTD 118: Magazine and Newspaper Design I 
The study of informational graphics and the role of computers in newspaper design. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTD 119: Internships 
The student may take an internship that relates to his or her goals as well as interest and skills. 
Credits: 
3 
- 
6 

ARTD 120: Field Study 
Off-campus and study abroad programs and projects. 
Credits: 
2 

ARTD 122: Digital Design II 
A continuation of ARTD 115. This course is designed to develop  skills required for careers in the digital publishing industry. The content includes computer skills; digital publishing concepts and operations; layout, design, measurement activities; and digital imaging as well as communication, collaboration and decision-making activities; critical thinking; and problem solving. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTD 123: Magazine and Newspaper Design II 
A continuation of ARTD 118.  The study of informational graphics and the role of computers in newspaper design. 
Credits: 
3 

FASD 100: Freshman Design Seminar 
Introduction to Design Major. (For Freshmen). 
Credits: 
1 

Drawing 
ARTR 
ARTR 003: Drawing III (Figure) 
In-depth concentration on rendering the human form. Emphasis is on exercises to enhance expressive interpretation of the human form. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTR 004: Drawing IV (Spatial Concepts) 
Comparison of similarities and differences in use of space in drawing of various cultures. Spring semester only. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTF 002. 

ARTR 005: Drawing V (Elective) 
Focus is on designing the human figure. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTR 004. 

ARTR 006: Drawing VI (Elective) 
Experimentation with various materials and techniques. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTR 005. 

ARTR 007: Drawing VII (Independent Study) 
Course examines level study of drawing, including compound subjects primarily in pencil, but also potentially in other media as well. This course expresses technical aspects of drawing through developed descriptive imagery. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTR 008: Figure Drawing Workshop 
In-depth concentration on rendering the human form. Continuation of ARTD 003, Drawing III (Figure). 
Credits: 
3 

ARTR 009: The Investigative Eye 
Recognizing drawing to be an activity partly physical and partly mental, this course is an intense studio experience that will utilize the “set-up” as a catalyst for investigating diverse aspects of form. An open attitude regarding materials and technique is encouraged. This is an advanced course and is recommended for those who wish to deepen their involvement with drawing. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Drawing I-IV. 

Electronic Studio Art 
ARTE 
ARTE 080: Computers in the Arts 
Basic computer literacy course. Introduces students to the basic components of IBM and Apple Macintosh computers; hardware and software; DOS; data management BASIC programming; graphics, sound and word processing, etc. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTE 081: Desktop Publishing 
Foundation of computer graphics with an emphasis on Desktop Publishing programs. Students design graphics using software packages available for Mac IIs. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTE 082: Presentation Graphics 
The use of advance Draw and Paint programs to produce presentation graphics from IBM and Macintosh. Students use various programs to create business presentations, organizational communications, image manipulation, and in-depth interaction with the system. Outputs are slides and videotapes. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTE 083: 2D Animation I 
The hands-on studio course offers project oriented interaction with a multi-plane computer animation system. Students create step-by-step storyboard, image capture, image making, recording and editing. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTE 084: Image Processing 
Use advance image processing techniques to enhance the creation of computer graphics. Students will work on scanned-in images and do image editing and manipulations. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTE 085: Digital Photography 
Integrates photography and computer image process techniques to create a new art form 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Photography I and Image Processing. 

ARTE 086: Multi-Media I 
Use multi-media system to create text, images, sound, events and present on computer screen simultaneously. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Image Processing. 

ARTE 087: Multi-Media II 
Advanced multi-media projects. Use of M motion card to create live images and use sound board to create sound effects and music to accompany the presentation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Multi-Media I. 

ARTE 088: Workshop in Computer Graphics 
Advanced electronic studio projects use software programs in-depth. Output can be of pre-press copy, videotape or in multi-media format. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTE 091: Independent Study I 
Students work on special projects under the direct supervision of faculty members. Finished computer projects must be of high quality. 
Credits: 
4 

ARTE 092: Independent Study II 
Students work on projects under direct supervision of faculty members. Projects should be creative, innovative, research-oriented. Finished work must be of high quality. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTE 093: Internship 
Students enrolled in this course will be given the opportunity to work in a field assignment in the area of their special interest and will be asked to meet professional standards set down by the organization to which they are assigned. Conferences will be held with the student during this period and the organization using the service will be asked to cooperate by reporting on the progress of the student. A written evaluation of performance is provided by the sponsoring agency or professional. At least six hours per week and a total of (84) hours are required to complete this internship. 
Credits: 
3 
- 
6 

ARTE 094: 2D Animation II 
This course provides students advanced skills to produce CG animation and the knowledge of the principles of animation to be built upon in subsequent courses leading up to the Portfolio course. Students can also apply skills learned in this class in other areas including stop motion and traditional animation. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTE 095: 3D Modeling &Animation I 
This course provides students advanced skills to produce CG animation and the knowledge of the principles of animation to be built upon in subsequent courses leading up to the Portfolio course. Students can also apply skills learned in this class in other areas including stop motion and traditional animation. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTE 096: 3D Modeling &Animation II 
A continuation of ARTE 095. This course provides students advanced skills to produce CG animation and the knowledge of the principles of animation to be built upon in subsequent courses leading up to the Portfolio course. Students can also apply skills learned in this class in other areas including stop motion and traditional animation. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTE 097: Intro to Game Design 
This course is an introduction to the theory and practice of the process of designing games and playful experiences. Students are familiarized with methods, concepts, techniques, and literature used in the design of games. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTE 098: Intro to Game Design II 
A continuation of ARTE 097. This course is an introduction to the theory and practice of the process of designing games and playful experiences. Students are familiarized with methods, concepts, techniques, and literature used in the design of games. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTE 099: Digital Media &Multi-Media Applications II 
This class investigates a variety of art making genres and technical applications that challenge form and content. Multi-media applications may range from mixed media assemblage and digital processes to alternative modes such as Collaboration, Performance Art or Installation Art 
Credits: 
3 

ARTE 100: Independent Study III 
Self-directed approach to the acquisition of knowledge and/or competence in which a student plans and carries out learning activities on his/her own, carried out under the guidance of an instructor.  Student works independently. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTE 101: Introduction to Graphic Systems Integration I 
Astudy of the design process and art direction. Emphasis on form and content through the selection, creation, and integration of typographic, photographic, illustrative, and design elements. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTE 102: Introduction to Graphic Systems Integration II 
A continuation of ARTE 101.  An advanced study of the design process and art direction. Emphasis on form and content through the selection, creation, and integration of typographic, photographic, illustrative, and design elements. 
Credits: 
3 

Fashion 
FASH 
FASH 004: Introduction to the Fashion Industry 
An introductory to the fashion industry; survey of careers in the fashion industry; discussion of fashion trends, production and their effects on design and merchandising. Fall semester. 
Credits: 
3 

FASH 006: Visual Merchandising 
An overview of visual merchandising, including a discussion of the principles and practices that guide the creation of window and promotional displays, store layout and design, and their impact on the fashion industry. 
Credits: 
3 

FASH 009: Fashion Studio I 
Analysis and development of skills in the art of clothing construction. 
Credits: 
3 

FASH 102: African American Dress 
An introduction to aesthetic and ecological perspectives on African American dress and adornment behavior from historic to contemporary. 
Credits: 
3 

FASH 124: Textiles 
Study of textiles from raw materials through manufacturing and finishing of fabrics as related to consumer selection, use and care. 
Credits: 
3 

FASH 162: Fashion Studio II 
Applies art principles to the design of clothing and studies techniques of flat-pattern drafting. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FASH 009. 

FASH 163: Fashion Illustration I 
Basic fashion illustration. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTF 001; ARTF 002. 

FASH 164: Fashion Illustration II 
Fashion illustration, croquis sketching and its relationship to design. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FASH 163. 

FASH 165: Directed Reading – Honors 
A supervised opportunity for independent study through supervised readings, leading to the completion of an undergraduate research project. Prerequisite(s): Consent of instructor. 
Credits: 
3 

FASH 166: Directed Readings I 
A supervised opportunity for independent study through supervised readings, leading to the completion of an undergraduate research project. Prerequisite(s): Consent of instructor. 
Credits: 
1 

FASH 167: Directed Readings II 
A continuation of FASH 166 which allows for further supervised independent study through supervised readings, leading to the completion of an undergraduate research project. Prerequisite(s): Consent of instructor. 
Credits: 
1 

FASH 168: Practicum in Fashion Retailing 
Application and observation of business practices in an apparel retail environment in the Washington, D.C. area, without compensation. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
Completion of 40 credits from the four-year sequence in fashion including 5-7 courses in sequence #FASH and consent of instructor. Student must be in good standing and must have completed all necessary CAR courses. Fall and Spring semesters and summer. 

FASH 169: Field Experience 
Consists of field experience in a commercial or governmental agency involved with fashion. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Senior status, consent of instructor. Fall and spring semesters and summer. 

FASH 172: Fashion Studio III 
Continuation of FASH 162, with emphasis on design by draping. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FASH 162. 

FASH 174: Fashion Industry II 
An overview of fashion from the concept to the consumer. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FASH 004. 

FASH 175: Fashion Buying &Merchandising 
A survey of fundamental activities, operations, and practices in retailing, including theory and quantitative analysis of inventory, planning, pricing, markdowns, and control for the profitable management of retail environments. Prerequisite(s): FASH 004 and MATH 006. 
Credits: 
3 

FASH 176: Fashion in Context 
A discussion of current topics of interest in the fashion industry. Prerequisite(s): FASH 004, FASH 186, or instructor consent. 
Credits: 
3 

FASH 177: Fashion in Context (Fashion Studio VI: Senior Collection Development) 
Continuation of FASH 176 
Credits: 
3 

FASH 182: Textile Design 
Examines the structural and decorative design of textiles. Laboratory includes such techniques as weaving, printing and knotting. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FASH 124. 

FASH 183: Fashion Studio IV: Autocad for the Apparel Industry 
This course focuses on the application of computer-aided design to fashion illustration, drafting, patternmaking and fabric surface design. 
Credits: 
3 

FASH 184: Fashion Studio IV: Autocad Apparel 
Study of oriental and occidental histories of textiles, including weaving, dyeing, and designing in historic time. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FASH 124. 

FASH 185: Traditional Folk Textiles and Dress 
Study of traditional folk textiles and dress throughout the world. Emphasis on textiles and dress styles still in use. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FASH 124. 

FASH 186: Clothing in History 
Presents the Oriental and occidental history of clothing and analyzes the significance to current problems. 
Credits: 
3 

FASH 187: Clothing and Human Behavior 
Study of the social, psychological, and anthropological aspects of clothing. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
one course in psychology or sociology. 

FASH 188: Current Clothing Topics 
Discusses current topics of concern in the fashion and textile field. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FASH 004 and FASH 124. 

FASH 190: Special Projects in Fashion I 
Deals with special projects in design or merchandising that meet the needs and interests of the student. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
consent of instructor. 

FASH 191: Special Projects in Fashion II 
Continuation of FASH 190. 
Credits: 
3 

FASH 192: Current Textile Topics 
Discusses topics of concern in the textile field. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FASH 124. 

FASH 193: Fashion Marketing 
Analysis of factors involved in fashion marketing, visual merchandising and promotions. Students will design and produce marketing plans, visual merchandising communications and fashion shows. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FASH 004 and FASH 174. 

FASH 194: Fashion Seminar 
A discussion of current topics of interest in the fashion and clothing field. Prerequisite(s): Instructor consent. 
Credits: 
3 

FASH 195: Fashion, Art, &Media Design 
An in-depth look at the role of how the fashion and art influence the design of various forms of media. Prerequisite(s): FASH 004, FASH 187, &FASH 193. 
Credits: 
3 

FASH 196: Sustainability in the Fashion Industry 
An introduction to the development of sustainable products and practices for fashion and interiors goods, their impact on consumers in the global marketplace, and the greening of the fashion and interiors industries. Prerequisite(s): FASH 124. Required for majors. 
Credits: 
3 

FASH 197: Fashion Entrepreneurship 
An exploration in the conceptualization and development of a fashion-related  business through the creation of a comprehensive business plan and participation in related entrepreneurial activities.  Prerequisite(s): FASH 004, FASH 175, FASH 193, or instructor consent. 
Credits: 
3 

FASH 198: Study Travel Tour 
An opportunity to receive academic credit for Fashion Merchandising Program-sponsored, international and domestic travel/learning experiences and related pre- and post- activities.  Destinations vary.  Note: Cost of travel not included in tuition and fees.  See Program Coordinator for additional information. Prerequisite: Instructor consent. 
Credits: 
3 

FASH 241: Fashion Seminar (Senior Capstone) 
Credits: 
3 

Foundation Design 
ARTF 
ARTF 001: Drawing I 
An introduction to visual hierarchy, composition, and pictorial space in drawing. Emphasis on linear perspective and the language of light and shadow using black and white media (graphite, charcoal and/or conte crayon). Development of skills and concepts in drawing based on historical models, lectures, demonstrations and critiques. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 002: Drawing II 
A continuation ARTF 001. An introduction to visual hierarchy, composition, and pictorial space in drawing. Emphasis on linear perspective and the language of light and shadow using black and white media (graphite, charcoal and/or conte crayon). Development of skills and concepts in drawing based on historical models, lectures, demonstrations and critiques 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 004: Drawing IV 
Advanced drawing problems in 2-dimensional composition and pictorial organization 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 011: Painting I 
This course introduces students to classical and contemporary painting, techniques and concepts, with emphasis on the understanding of its formal language and the fundamentals of artistic expression. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 031: Printmaking I 
Students will learn techniques of fine art printmaking, e.g. relief printing, monotype, intaglio, collagraph and collage. T 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 033: Drawing III 
The human figure is the focus of this class. Working from the model, the class will consider the gesture and proportions of the figure. Students will be encouraged to conceive of the figure as a series of volumes in space. Basic anatomy will be introduced. The dynamic and expressive content of drawing will be encouraged. Media will be primarily pencil and charcoal. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 087: Two-Dimensional Concepts I 
Basic elements of two-dimensional design - dot, line, shape, value, texture, space and color are introduced, along with such principles as rhythm, repetition, contrast, variety, balance and harmony. They, along with form, are presented as visual building blocks of a vocabulary necessary to the process of making visual statements. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 088: Two-Dimensional Concepts II 
Continuation of Two-Dimensional Concepts I. Monochromatic, Chromatic Grays, Analogous, Complementary, Split Complementary, Dyadic and Triadic color schemes/systems/harmonies are introduced through various problems and exercises and presented as additional vocabulary necessary for making visual statements. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 089: Three Dimensional Concepts I 
This is a course designed to introduce the student to three-dimensional problem solving techniques through the use of various materials. This course may be team taught 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 090: Three-Dimensional Concepts II 
A continuation of Three-Dimensional Concepts I. The course provides an in-depth study of problem solving techniques as they relate to resolved products. This course may be team taught. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 114: Computer in the Arts 
Designed for students who wish to integrate work in computing with work in several arts disciplines 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 121: Ceramics I 
Ceramics I -X (ARTF 121-130) focus on introducing and building students skills in working with clay. Emphasis will be placed on the design elements; line, shape, texture, and color. Focus will be on the hand building techniques; functional as well as sculptural applications, and  introduction to traditional and historical ceramic art.   Students will be exposed to the craft of wheel thrown pottery  Various glaze and decoration techniques for finishing work will be introduced in the beginning classes. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 122: Ceramics II 
Ceramics I -X (ARTF 121-130) focuses on introducing and building students skills in working with clay. Emphasis will be placed on the design elements; line, shape, texture, and color. Focus will be on the hand building techniques; functional as well as sculptural applications, and  introduction to traditional and historical ceramic art.   Students will be exposed to the craft of wheel thrown pottery  Various glaze and decoration techniques for finishing work will be introduced in the beginning classes. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 123: Ceramics III 
Ceramics I -X (ARTF 121-130) focuses on introducing and building students skills in working with clay. Emphasis will be placed on the design elements; line, shape, texture, and color. Focus will be on the hand building techniques; functional as well as sculptural applications, and  introduction to traditional and historical ceramic art.   Students will be exposed to the craft of wheel thrown pottery  Various glaze and decoration techniques for finishing work will be introduced in the beginning classes. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 124: Ceramics IV 
Ceramics I -X (ARTF 121-130) focuses on introducing and building students skills in working with clay. Emphasis will be placed on the design elements; line, shape, texture, and color. Focus will be on the hand building techniques; functional as well as sculptural applications, and  introduction to traditional and historical ceramic art.   Students will be exposed to the craft of wheel thrown pottery  Various glaze and decoration techniques for finishing work will be introduced in the beginning classes. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 125: Ceramics V 
Ceramics I -X (ARTF 121-130) focuses on introducing and building students skills in working with clay. Emphasis will be placed on the design elements; line, shape, texture, and color. Focus will be on the hand building techniques; functional as well as sculptural applications, and  introduction to traditional and historical ceramic art.   Students will be exposed to the craft of wheel thrown pottery  Various glaze and decoration techniques for finishing work will be introduced in the beginning classes. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 126: Ceramics VI 
Ceramics I -X (ARTF 121-130) focuses on introducing and building students skills in working with clay. Emphasis will be placed on the design elements; line, shape, texture, and color. Focus will be on the hand building techniques; functional as well as sculptural applications, and  introduction to traditional and historical ceramic art.   Students will be exposed to the craft of wheel thrown pottery  Various glaze and decoration techniques for finishing work will be introduced in the beginning classes. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 128: Ceramics VIII 
Ceramics I -X (ARTF 121-130) focuses on introducing and building students skills in working with clay. Emphasis will be placed on the design elements; line, shape, texture, and color. Focus will be on the hand building techniques; functional as well as sculptural applications, and  introduction to traditional and historical ceramic art.   Students will be exposed to the craft of wheel thrown pottery  Various glaze and decoration techniques for finishing work will be introduced in the beginning classes. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 129: Ceramics IX 
Ceramics I -X (ARTF 121-130) focuses on introducing and building students skills in working with clay. Emphasis will be placed on the design elements; line, shape, texture, and color. Focus will be on the hand building techniques; functional as well as sculptural applications, and  introduction to traditional and historical ceramic art.   Students will be exposed to the craft of wheel thrown pottery  Various glaze and decoration techniques for finishing work will be introduced in the beginning classes. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 130: Ceramics X 
Ceramics I -X (ARTF 121-130) focuses on introducing and building students skills in working with clay. Emphasis will be placed on the design elements; line, shape, texture, and color. Focus will be on the hand building techniques; functional as well as sculptural applications, and  introduction to traditional and historical ceramic art.   Students will be exposed to the craft of wheel thrown pottery  Various glaze and decoration techniques for finishing work will be introduced in the beginning classes. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 137: Ceramics Sculpture Workshop 
Advanced problems in the various techniques of sculpture. Emphasis on individual creative expression. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 138: Ceramics Sculpture 
This course expands upon the principles and processes introduced in Beginning Sculpture, developing a higher level of technical competence and critical sophistication. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTF 141: Sculpture I 
Projects in sculpture with an emphasis on contemporary theory and issues, the development of individual concepts and the exploration of materials, tools, and processes. 
Credits: 
3 

Interdisciplinary 
ARID 
ARID 100: Solar Car Design 
Team taught, collaborative group project with Schools of Business, Communications and Engineering to design a solar-powered vehicle for the Sunrayce national competition. The project involves graphics and layout, artistic rendering, electronic imaging, uniform design, computer modeling and sculpting. Students will participate in all areas of development; concept, production, and the competitive race. Course is cross-linked with Engineering and Business. 
Credits: 
3 

ARID 102: Capstone Senior Project I 
Support the the conceptualization and development of a thesis or capstone project  under the supervision of the faculty adviser. 
Credits: 
3 

ARID 103: Senior Workshop/Capstone II 
Continuation of ARID 102. Support the the conceptualization and development of a thesis or capstone project under the supervision of the faculty adviser. 
Credits: 
3 

ARID 105: Digital Media and Multimedia Applications 
An introduction to digital media fundamentals including audio, video formats, storage and delivery. Windows Media technology will be extensively utilized as a method for digital content manipulation, rights management and internet transfer. 
Credits: 
3 

Interior Design 
INTD 
INTD 098: Environmental Factors of Interior Design 
An introduction to the design, the environmental and the material implications of spaces for living. Fall semester. 
Credits: 
3 

INTD 100: Drafting Interior Design Communication 
Instruction in drafting techniques necessary for the professional communication of interior ideas and information. Fall semester. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
AAF 

INTD 101: Advanced Drafting Techniques of Interiors 
Instruction in advanced drafting skills necessary for the professional communication of ideas and information as related to interior design. Including one and two point perspectives. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
INTD 100. Spring semester. 

INTD 102: History of Interiors & Architecture 
Historical development of furniture, textiles and accessories, and their relationship to interiors, ancient to 1846. Fall semester. 
Credits: 
3 

INTD 103: Contemporary Interiors and Furnishings 
Development of furniture, textiles and accessories and their relationship to interiors, Victorian to present. Spring semester. 
Credits: 
3 

INTD 104: Construction of Interior Spaces 
A study of construction terminology, techniques, materials, etc. use in the construction of residential structures, as they relate to interior design. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INTD 100 or consent of instructor. 

INTD 105: Interior Model Building 
Studio course in which the techniques of interior model building materials, methods, interior construction techniques, are used to construct a residential model focusing on the interior. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INTD 104 or consent of instructor 

INTD 106: CAD for Interiors I 
Computer assisted design drafting for interior spaces. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INTD 101 or consent of instructor. 

INTD 107: CAD II 
Continuation of INTD 106 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INTD 106 

INTD 108: Interior Graphics and Rendering 
An introduction to contemporary media and methods of rendering perspectives. Emphasis on techniques and different methods of applying color such as water colors, acrylic, zipatone and magic markers. 
Credits: 
4 

INTD 109: Materials & Interior Specifications 
Introduces you to many of the core aspects of residential interior design, including concept development, colour theory, design principles, sketching, ergonomics, space planning and technical drawing, sourcing and presenting materials and providing material specifications 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INTD 098 

INTD 110: Presentation & Rendering Techniques 
This course is designed to reinforce presentation techniques and graphic technical skills introduced in sketching and rendering and in computer-aided drafting courses. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
AAF, INTD 100, 106 

INTD 111: Interior Design I - Residential 
Study of residential interior design and the functioning of the living environment. Sessions include viable solutions to limited living areas such as apartments, single rooms and townhomes. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INTD 100, 104, 106 

INTD 112: Advanced Residential Interior Design 
Study of residential interior design including the functioning of a barrier free interior living environment; kitchen and other working areas; renovations to existing residences and creative planning of large scale and awkward residential spaces is emphasized. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INTD 111. 

INTD 113: Interior Design II - Office 
Studio course dealing with the interior design offices, such as law, medical, insurance, banks, accounting, etc. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INTD 100, 104, 106 

INTD 114: Interior Design Professional Practice 
The course explores principles, procedures and practices including compensation and fees, contracts, business forms, budget management, retainers, designer-client and designer-trade relationships, as well as legal considerations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior or Senior Interior and Architecture Only. 

INTD 115: Practicum in Interior Design 
Application and observation of business practices in an interior design establishment in the Washington, D.C. area, without compensation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
completion of 80 credits from the four-year sequence in interior design, completion of INTD 110, Presentation Techniques and INTD 202 Advanced Residential and consent of instructor. Fall and spring semesters and summer. 

INTD 116: Lighting of Interior Spaces 
Intensive analysis and planning of lighting and lighting systems for various types of interior spaces. 
Credits: 
3 

INTD 117: Office Interior Design 
Studio course dealing with the interior design offices, such as law, medical, insurance, banks, accounting, etc..Prerequisite: INTD 112. 
Credits: 
4 

INTD 118: Interior Design III - Commercial 
Studio course dealing with various commercial interiors, such as hotels, educational facilities, restaurants, shops, and other specialized interiors. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
INTD 100, 104, 106, ARTD 113. 

INTD 121: Interior Design V - Thesis Project 
Research methods, analysis, and program development for thesis project in interior design. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
Junior or Senior Interior and Architecture Only. 

INTD 125: Portfolio Development & Review 
This course introduces students to the principles of layout, design and production of newspapers, magazines, websites and other digital media. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior or Senior Interior and Architecture Only. 

INTD 130: Furniture Design 
This course will be an introduction to the skills and techniques for furniture design. The primary focus will be on developing innovative concepts through drawing and model-making. 
Credits: 
3 

INTD 169: Interior Design Fieldwork 
Consists of fieldwork in an interior design firm or other suitable related approved area. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
Field Work/Internship 

Painting 
ARTA 
ARTA 011: Painting I 
Introduction to traditional and contemporary techniques, with emphasis on control of paint and painting form. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTF 001. 

ARTA 012: Painting II 
Continuation of ARTA 011, with emphasis on various approaches to painting. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTF 011. 

ARTA 013: Painting III (Mixed Media) 
Study of physical make-up of paints and use of tools. Exploration of various means to achieve aesthetic ends. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTA 014: Watercolor Painting I 
Use of all contemporary aqueous media, including experimental approaches from documentary to nonobjective. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTF 001. 

ARTA 015: Watercolor Painting II 
Continuation of ARTA 014, with development of a personal approach and exploration of varied techniques. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTA 014. 

ARTA 016: Figure Painting I 
Introduction to figure painting. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTA 011. 

ARTA 017: Figure Painting II 
Intermediate Figure Painting. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTA 016. 

ARTA 018: Figure Painting III 
Advanced Figure Painting. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTA 017. 

ARTA 019: Public Art I (Mural Painting) 
Art in Public Places. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTA 018. 

ARTA 020: Public Art II (Mural Painting) 
Advanced Art in Public Places. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTA 019. 

ARTA 023: Introduction to Painting Workshop 
Directed study in Painting. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTA 011. 

ARTA 024: Advanced Painting Workshop 
Directed study in Painting. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTA 023. 

ARTA 025: Intermediate Rhythm Techniques Workshop 
Explanation, development, and practice of a rhythmic approach to the design and production of art based on the concepts of traditional African "Work Rhythms/Songs." 
Credits: 
3 

ARTA 026: Studio Internship 
Provides practical experience working with a professional artist in the student's area of interest or specialization. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTA 22: Painting VI 
Credits: 
3 
- 
0 

ARTG 212: Painting V 
Credits: 
3 
- 
0 

Photography 
ARTP 
ARTD 080: Digital Imaging for Photographers 
Students learn the theoretical and practical aspects of photographic digital imaging. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTP 031: Printmaking I 
Introduction to the medium of printmaking through traditional and contemporary methods and materials. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTP 032: Silkscreen Printmaking 
Presents the silkscreen process of printmaking, dealing with problems and original compositions, with emphasis on color printing. Fall semester only. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTP 033: Relief Printmaking 
Exploration of woodcuts, linoleum cuts, and contemporary relief printing techniques, with emphasis on color and color registration methods. Spring semester only. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTP 031. 

ARTP 034: Lithography 
Introduction to photo-lithography and color printing with use of lithographic crayon, tusche, and autographic materials. Fall semester only. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTP 031. 

ARTP 035: Intaglio Printmaking 
Projects in etching, engraving, aquatint, drypoint, soft ground, life ground, and mixed media, with a focus on color intaglio techniques. Spring semester only. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTP 031. 

ARTP 039: Printmaking Workshop I 
Consists of advanced workshop and independent investigation, with scheduled group reviews and critiques. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTP 031. 

ARTP 040: Printmaking Workshop II 
Continuation of ARTP 039. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of instructor. 

ARTP 041: Social Graphics I 
Survey of historical precedents in printmaking and its use as an educational medium. Use of appropriate printmaking methods and materials. Emphasis on contemporary issues, ideas, and ideals. Fall semester only. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTP 042: Social Graphics II 
A continuation of Social Graphics I. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTP 041. Spring semester only. 

ARTP 043: Independent Study in Printmaking I 
Independent work in printmaking. Presentation of a comprehensive body of prints at the end of the semester. Periodic meeting with instructor for progress evaluation. Preliminary proposal required at the beginning of the course. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
senior standing. Fall semester. 

ARTP 044: Independent Study in Printmaking II 
Independent work in printmaking. Presentation of a cohesive body of prints at the end of the semester. Periodic meetings with the instructor for progress evaluation. Preliminary proposal required at the beginning of the semester. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Senior standing. Spring semester only. 

ARTP 050: Basic Black &White Photography 
Introduction to the basic black and white photography methods, plus an overview of history of processes and aesthetics in photography. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTP 051: Intermediate Photography 
Prerequisite: ARTP 050, or 8 mounted photographs. This is a course in advanced black and white photography, with special attention given to the development of a personal exposure system, along with basic techniques in design concepts as they relate to photography. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTP 052: Photography II. Basic Color 
An introduction to color photography. The course is designed to give the student a basic knowledge of color photography through the use of negative/positive processes. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTP 051, or 8 mounted photographs. 

ARTP 055: Studio Photography 
In this course the student will be introduced to studio lighting techniques as they pertain to still life set-ups. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTP 053. 

ARTP 056: Documentary Photography 
In this course the student will learn techniques on how to develop a Photo Essay and how to illustrate commercial assignments using these techniques. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTP 053. 

ARTP 057: Senior Photography 
This is a course in advanced photography for seniors, with special attention given to the development of a personal exposure system, along with basic techniques in design concepts as they relate to photography. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Photo Majors only 

ARTP 058: Problems in Photography 
Individual study in photography of special interest. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Majors/Minors only 

ARTP 059: Independent Study in Photography 
Designed to provide independent study/researchin photography under the guidance of a faculty advisor or the equivalent 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Photo Majors only 

ARTP 060: Photography Internship I 
This course offers the student the opportunity to work in a professional environment. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTP 054, or ARTP 055, or ARTP 056. 

ARTP 061: Photography Internship II 
This course offers the student the extended opportunity to work in a professional environment. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARTP 057. 

ARTP 085: Digital Photography 
Integrates photography and computer image process techniques to create a new art form 
Credits: 
3 

Sculpture 
ARTS 
ARTS 141: Sculpture I: Modeling and Casting 
Using structured studio projects, the student develops a formal vocabulary of expression through methodic idea development and forming techniques. This course guides the student through basic sculpture processes and practical aspects of the art as well as introduces a conceptual and construction language. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTS 142: Sculpture II: Fabrication and Carving 
A more expressive approach than with Sculpture I. This class introduces the student to the additive and subtractive sculpture making procedures emphasizing joining and shaping of forms. Visual information from the natural and artificial world is gathered. Elements of structure and pattern are also examined. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTS 143: Figure Sculpture I 
Students sculpt clay likenesses from live models through observation and modeling techniques. Careful and continuous study from life expands our understanding of structure and shape, clarifies our perception of what we see, and hones our ability to form what we intend. The human form also inspires psychological exploration of expression. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTS 144: Figure Sculpture II 
Continuation of Figure Sculpture I. This class develops the student’s skills and individual style by encouraging fidelity to nature and personal interpretations of character. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTS 145: Figure Sculpture III 
Advanced figure study. The student is expected to cultivate a naturalistic style or personal sense of abstraction. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTS 146: Figure Sculpture IV 
Further advanced figure study. The student is expected to hone a developing style. In addition, the student may work as a teaching assistant to the instructor and is expected to accept certain studio responsibilities. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTS 147: Wood Sculpture 
This structured course introduces the student to manual techniques involved in wood carving and fabrication processes. The class also surveys forms of fine wood sculpture and other woodwork, identifying and seasoning wood, wood working tools, equipment and processes. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTS 148: Stone Sculpture 
This course introduces the student to stone carving techniques. Through certain carving exercises, students will design, rough out, and chase stone sculpture, as well as make their own tools. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTS 149: Metal Sculpture I: Welding and Fabrication 
This course introduces the student to welding, brazing, and soldering techniques, as well as fundamental metal construction processes necessary for armature building and direct sculpture. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTS 150: Metal Sculpture II: Smithing and Forge Fabrication 
Advanced construction processes for direct sculpture. The course introduces hot forming, hammered and fabricated metal sculpture techniques. Students will also learn to make their own tools. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTS 151: Foundry I: Bronze Casting 
Introduction workshop to the casting process. Substitution theory and gating systems, wax working, mold making, investment and ceramic shell molds, foundry safety and metal pouring. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTS 153: Sculpture Workshop I 
Advanced Study. Students will pursue personal investigations in one or more sculpture making processes. Shop economics and responsibilities are also developed in a collective atelier environment. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTS 154: Sculpture Workshop II 
Further sculpture workshop study. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTS 155: Independent Studio I 
Advanced study in personal sculpture direction. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTS 156: Independent Studio II 
Further advanced study in personal direction. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTS 157: Internship 
A career-oriented work experience related to the student’s academic studies, professional and educational goals. The experience must be supervised by a qualified supervisor. 
Credits: 
3 

Experimental Studio Art 
ARTX 
ARTX 161: Experimental Studio I 
An experimental studio encouraging exploration of improvisational and unconventional combinations of media. Open to graduate and advanced undergraduate students. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTX 162: Experimental Studio II 
Problems in three dimensional mixed media. May be repeated for up to 9 hours of credit. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTX 163: Experimental Studio III 
Introduction to Environmental and Public Art. An introduction to designing scale models, maquette construction, safety, security, philosophical and social considerations in the execution of art works for public spaces. Open to graduate and advanced undergraduate students. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTX 164: Experimental Studio IV 
Introductory problems in cable, mast and membrane construction. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTX 182: Experimental Studio Workshop I 
Advanced experimental studio exploring improvisational and unconventional combinations of media. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTX 183: Experimental Studio 
Advanced problems in environmental and public art. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTX 184: Experimental Studio Workshop II 
Special problems in multi-media practices. 
Credits: 
3 

ARTX 185: Experimental Studio Seminar 
Advanced problems in cable, mast and membrane construction. 
Credits: 
3 

Biology 
BIOL 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
BIOL 101: General Biology 
An introductory sequence of two courses designed for all Biology majors that presents the unifying concepts of contemporary biology at all organizational levels through integrated lectures and laboratories. All basic life properties in prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems are studied. 
Credits: 
4 

BIOL 102: General Biology II 
An introductory sequence of two courses designed for all Biology majors that presents the unifying concepts of contemporary biology at all organizational levels through integrated lectures and laboratories. All basic life properties in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems are studied. 
Credits: 
4 

BIOL 190: 290, 390, 490. Independent Investigations 
Conception and development of an independent research project. 
Credits: 
3 

BIOL 200: Genetics Lec/Lab 
Introduction to the study of the chemical composition and structure of the genetic material and its transmission and function in development and metabolism. Combines classical and molecular-biological approaches to the understanding of mechanisms of inheritance. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102. 

BIOL 202: Plant Diversity Lec/Lab 
Introduction to diversity of plants. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102 

BIOL 204: Science and Public Policy 
This course explores ethical, historical, and political aspects of the utilization of scientific knowledge for the development of public policy. 
Credits: 
3 

BIOL 205: Invertebrate Biology 
Study of representative invertebrates, including the morphology, life history, and phylogenetic relationships. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102. 

BIOL 207: Biosphere 
An examination of the evolutionary history of the dynamics of the biosphere (the upper few kilometers of the crust, atmosphere, oceans, and anthroposhere) with particular focus on the role of life in the regulation of chemical and physical conditions. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102. 

BIOL 208: Native Plants 
Nontechnical field and laboratory course dealing with the collection, identification, preparation, and uses of native wild plants. BIOL 101/102. 
Credits: 
4 

BIOL 210: Field Biology 
Field course involving the collection, preservation, and identification of native and introduced Flora and Fanua. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102. 

BIOL 217: Honors Orientation 
 Pursuit of an independent literature research problem in one subdiscipline.For Honors students only 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore status and consent of instructor. 

BIOL 218: Directed Readings 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. For Honors students only. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore status and consent of instructor. 

BIOL 219: Topics in Aspects of Aging 
Study of normal and pathological changes occurring in the aging human body with special emphasis on age-related chronic diseases. Topics addressed include: analysis of biological theories of aging, cultural and ethnic influence on aging pathologies, and other factors impacting the aging process. 
Credits: 
1 

BIOL 220: General Microbiology 
Introductory course involving study of the identification, culture, physiology, and genetics of bacteria 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102, BIOL 200 

BIOL 230: Ecology 
This lecture-laboratory course considers how the physical and biotic environments of animal and plant species influence patterns of distribution and abundance, with specific emphasis on features of natural communities. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102. 

BIOL 240: Evolution 
Includes the study of Darwin's theory of evolution and its implications, evidence from various biological disciplines supporting Darwin's evolutionary theory, chemical evolution and organic evolution from the cell to modern man. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 200. 

BIOL 251: Comparative Anatomy 
Lectures analyze the functional anatomy of vertebrates and the evolution and embryonic development of their structures and functions. Laboratories involve dissection of selected vertebrate organisms. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102. 

BIOL 253: Plant Anatomy 
Lecture-laboratory course dealing with the study of the structure and development of the cells, tissues, and organs of vascular plants. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102. 

BIOL 302: Organismal Biology 
A comprehensive study of form, physiology, and phylogeny in the major groups of living organisms. Emphasis on the commonality of mechanisms utilized for growth, reproduction, and adaptation to environmental change by different groups of organisms. MARC Honor Course. 
Credits: 
4 

BIOL 310: Cell Biology 
Examines the chemistry, structure, and function of cells and their components and the microscopic details of mammalian tissues and organs. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 200 

BIOL 315: Quantitative Biology 
An introduction to quantitative methods of measuring biological processes, evaluating and interpreting experimental data, and monitoring biological phenoma. Marc Honors Course. 
Credits: 
3 

BIOL 317: Directed Readings for Juniors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. For Honors students only. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
 Junior status and consent of instructor. 

BIOL 318: Proposal Development 
A hands-on grant writing course that is designed to engage the beginning grant writer in the proposal development process and immerse professionals in strategies for success. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Honors Only 

BIOL 319: Aging Physiology 
The goal of this course is to define aging, review the theories of aging, and examine the physical changes in body systems associated with aging. This course will review changes in the cardiovascular, endocrine, gastrointestinal, immune, integumentary, musculoskeletal, nervous, reproductive, respiratory, sensory, and urinary systems. 
Credits: 
1 

BIOL 320: Molecular Biology 
Discussion and experimentation covering the structure and function of prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes and their gene products. Regulation of genetic expression is stressed. The theoretical basis and application of current research techniques used in basic and applied molecular biology and genetic engineering are covered. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 200. 

BIOL 328: Global Climate Change 
Discussion and experimentation covering the structure and function of prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes and their gene products. Regulation of genetic expression is stressed. The theoretical basis and application of current research techniques used in basic and applied molecular biology and genetic engineering are covered. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 230. 

BIOL 329: Global Environment 
This course is an introduction to global ecology. It considers the critical problems facing humanity with regard to environmental ecological damage, agriculture, climatic change and depletable mineral, water and energy resources. All spatial scales are discussed with emphasis on global/local/urban interrelations and their impact on human health and ecosystems. The global environmental/ecological crisis I discussed in the context of North/South relations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102 or consent of the instructor. 

BIOL 331: History and Philosophy of Science 
A study of the major philosophical principles that have led to the development of the scientific method and the major discoveries of science. 
Credits: 
3 

BIOL 340: Bacterial Physiology 
Comprehensive study of biochemical mechanisms and physiological behavior in bacteria. Prerequisites BIOL 220, and CHEM. 142. 
Credits: 
3 

BIOL 341: Animal Physiology 
Lecture-laboratory course covering the muscles, nervous system, reproduction, and physiological regulation. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL101/102. 

BIOL 344: Plant Physiology 
Study of the physiologic processes and regulatory mechanisms associated with growth and development primarily in higher plants. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102. 

BIOL 348: Biogeochemistry 
Survey of the distribution of the elements composing the earth with discussion of the reasons underlying these patterns, including examination of biological interactions. 
Credits: 
3 

BIOL 390: Independent Investigations 
Conception and development of an individual research project. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior and consent of instructor. 

BIOL 402: Insect Biology 
This lecture/laboratory course includes taxonomy, morphology, physiology, behavior, and ecological and evolutionary relationships in the class Insecta. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102, and BIOL 200. 

BIOL 403: Research in Parastism 
Considers the biology of metazoan parasites of man and animals and the host-parasite relationship. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor. 

BIOL 404: Parasitology 
Considers the biology of protozoan and metazoan parasites of man and animals and the host-parasite relationship. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
consent of instructor. 

BIOL 405: Social Insects 
Deals with behavioral and systemic studies in social insects in their natural habitats. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102. 

BIOL 406: Experimental Parasitology 
Emphasizes modern approaches to parasitology, including molecular biology and immunology 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
Consent from instructor. 

BIOL 407: Ichthyology, 
A study of fish biology, including taxonomy, morphology, population dynamics and distribution of fishes, and a critical review of current ichthyological research. The laboratory consists of field experience, along with dissection of representative forms. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102 or consent of instructor. 

BIOL 408: Herpetology 
This lecture-laboratory course concerns the study of amphibians and reptiles and focuses on the taxonomic, morphological, physiological, behavioral, ecological and evolutionary relationships among members of these vertebrates. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102 or consent of instructor. 

BIOL 409: Animal Behavior 
Environmental and quantitative approach to behavior illustrating basic principles, with emphasis on physiological bases, ecological correlates, and evolutionary aspects. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102 or consent of instructor, BIOL 310 or consent of instructor. 

BIOL 410: Plant Systematics 
Lecture-laboratory course involving the basic principles and concepts in the classification and nomenclature of vascular plants. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102. 

BIOL 412: Biological Anthropology 
This course will use data from evolutionary theory, primatology, comparative anatomy, genetics, and paleontology to understand the latest hypotheses regarding human evolution and modern human behavioral biology. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 240 

BIOL 413: Developmental Biology 
Discusses gametogenesis, fertilization, cleavage, differentiation and mechanisms controlling these processes. Laboratory includes study of living invertebrate specimens. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 310 or  BIOL 320. 

BIOL 415: Molecular Genetics 
Lecture-laboratory course in which studies of plant an microbial genomes are conducted through nucleic acid analysis and applications of recombinant-DNA technology and environmental mutagenesis. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102, BIOL 200, CHEM. 156 or the equivalent; and advanced standing. 

BIOL 416: Advanced Cytology 
Analyzes untrastructural cytology, with emphasis on current techniques in transmission and scanning electron microscopy and cytochemistry. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102, BIOL 200, BIOL 310. 

BIOL 417: Evolutionary Medicine 
This course introduces the rapidly emerging field of evolutionary medicine as one approach to appreciating evolution as a unifying principle of biology. The primary goal is for students to better understand the evolutionary nature of many issues connected to human health and to better understand the field of evolution via examples that are medically relevant. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 200 

BIOL 419: Bioinformatics 
This course is an introduction to the application of computational methods to biological data analysis and for discovery. The focus will be on computational methods in Genomics and Proteomics 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 200 

BIOL 420: Cancer Biology 
Examines normal vs. cancerous cell growth; examines genetic mechanisms, protein modifications and the multi-hit hypothesis that leads to cancer onset, as well as associated stages of disease and treatment/therapies. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL  310 OR 320; CHEM through Organic 

BIOL 421: Virology 
Study of the structure, biochemistry, and biologic relations of viruses. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 200 

BIOL 422: Immunology 
Covers humoral and cellular immunity against infections and non-self agents; cellular interactions and differentiations events associated with the immune response; and applications of immunology to biomedicine. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 310 or 320; Chemistry through organic 

BIOL 424: Environmental Microbiology 
An integrated approach to studying the role of microorganisms in environmental waste management. The microbiology of air, water, soil and sewers are addressed. Emphases are placed on the public health implications of microbes and their products in the environment, and the role of microbes in bioremediation of hazardous chemical wastes. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 220. 

BIOL 425: Pathogenic Bacteriology 
Lecture-laboratory course in which the pathways of etiological agents of disease, methods of identification and therapy, and control measures are considered. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 220. 

BIOL 426: Food Microbiology 
Lecture-laboratory course involving the microbiology and epidemiology of food-borne diseases and food poisoning and microbiology of fermented foods. Methods of prevention and identification are considered. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 220. 

BIOL 430: Biostatistics 
Deals with measures of central tendency and dispersion; binominal, student, and chi-square distribution; and hypothesis testing related to biological problems. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
college algebra or the equivalent. 

BIOL 432: Plant Populations and Communities 
Lectures, labs and field trips introduce students to the structure and dynamics of plant populations and communities from an evolutionary perspective. Students develop and awareness of abiotic factors and ecological relationships between species that influence the abundance and distribution of plants in the natural environment, and the important role of plants in the global ecosystem. Laboratory exercises allow students to design and implement field and greenhouse experiments. Students will gain experience with internet resources in searching the primary literature in plant ecology, as well as analyzing and presenting scientific data. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102, BIOL 200, BIOL, 230 or consent of instructor. 

BIOL 441: Endocrinology 
Examines the endocrine system in a systematic manner, beginning with consideration of the chemistry, function and physiological roles of the hormones. Special emphasis on the molecular mechanism of action of these hormones and how are they are involved in the regulation of physiological processes. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 200, Chemistry through organic and consent of instructor. 

BIOL 444: Neurophysiology 
The function of the nervous systems from a molecular and cellular perspective. Topics include cellular neurophysiology, synaptic transmission, processing of sensory information and motor control of movement. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 341. 

BIOL 445: Biochemical Genetics 
Study of the chemical nature of the genetic materials, mutation, the genetic code, protein synthesis, enzyme subunit structure, genetic complementation, and gene action and development. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102, BIOL 200, CHEM. 142, and consent of instructor. 

BIOL 446: Mycology 
General study of the biology of fungi, with emphasis on their development, phylogency, and ecologic distribution. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102. 

BIOL 448: Techniques in Biological Chemistry 
Introduces student to the theoretical bases and practical applications of experimental techniques in cellular biochemistry. Lecture-laboratory instruction on the following: pH, buffers and solutions (gravimetric and spectrophotometric methods); purification of enzymes and other proteins by chromatographic (MEC, IEC, etc.) and electrophoretic (PAGE, SDS-PAGE, IEF) methods; enzyme kinetics (Km, inhibition); isozymes (pl, Km, Mr, densitometry); estimation of relative molecular mass of proteins by denaturing and non-denaturing methods (retardation coefficients); quantitative (graphic and statistical) analysis of experimental data; BASIC computer programming. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
a survey course in biochemistry. 

BIOL 449: Population Genetics 
Focuses on the genetic structure of population, factors affecting gene frequency, geno-type-environment interaction, and genetic relationship in natural and artificial populations. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 200 and consent of instructor. 

BIOL 450: Molecular Genetics 
Students learn transcription and translational regulation of gene expression, concepts of knockout and transgenic technology, RFLP and restriction mapping, and fundamental concepts of molecular aspects of genome size, concepts in bioinformatics and hands-on experience in basic recombinant DNA techniques. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 200, 320 or CHEM 151 (Biochemistry) 

BIOL 451: Ultrastructure 
Course in electron microscopy undertaking methods of preparation of biological specimens and a study of their fine structure. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 310 or equivalent. 

BIOL 452: Cell Signaling 
Study selected pathways of signal tranduction as they relate to information transfer from cell surface receptors to DNA binding sites and/or response elements within the nucleus. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 310 or equivalent. 

BIOL 454: Principles of Plant Pathology 
Lecture-laboratory study of the nature, etiologic agents, and host-parasite interactions associated with plant disease development. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102 and advanced standing. 

BIOL 455: Experimental Plant Morphogenesis 
Study of the physical and biochemical factors regulating cell, tissue, and organ differentiation in higher plants. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 310 and consent. 

BIOL 457: Morphology of Lower Plants 
Intensive examination of the development, ecology, and phylogenetic relationships of the prokaryotes, fungi, algal groups, and bryophytes. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102 and advanced standing. 

BIOL 459: Morphology of Vascular Plants 
In-depth study of the origin, structure, ontogenetic patterns, and evolutionary relationships of vascular plants. Alternate year course. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101/102. 

BIOL 460: Molecular Plant Physiology 
This course is designed to provide students with comprehensive exposure to the subject of plant physiology. The laboratory exercises provide hands-on experiences with experiments and training in instrumental skills. Topics include: water relations, photosynthesis, inorganic nutrition, metabolism of organic materials, and plant growth regulation, with emphasis on environmental factors in the physiology of plants. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 344 

BIOL 462: Biotechnology 
Prepares students with an in-depth understanding of modern techniques in molecular genetics so they can compete in an ever-growing biotechnology job market. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 320 or BIOL 450 

BIOL 475: Human Evolutionary Biology 
Explores all aspects of human biology and behavior from an evolutionary perspective. HEB thus provides students with the knowledge and skills they need to investigate and answer questions about how and why humans are the way we are, and why that matters for real world problems. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 200 

BIOL 489: Honors Research 
Conception and development of an individual research project. 
Credits: 
1 
- 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Enrollment in the COAS Honors Program and consent of instructor. 

BIOL 491/492: Honors Research 
Continuation of BIOL 489 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
Honors only. 

BIOL 493: Senior Seminar 
Weekly seminar for undergraduates on current topics in biology. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 200 and all core electives. 

BIOL 493, 494: Senior Seminar 
 Weekly seminar for undergraduates on current topics in biology. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 200 and all core electives. 

BIOL 495/496: Honors Research 
A course designed to provide students with the opportunity to plan and execute research problems which denote a level of creativity and mastery of research technology beyond that expected in standard laboratory training. Marc Honors Course. 
Credits: 
3 

BIOL 498/499: Honors Seminar 
 Weekly seminar devoted to discussions of various aspects of biological research. Emphasis is placed on presentations by invited speakers and presentations of student research projects. Marc Honors Course. 
Credits: 
0 

BIOL 500: Topics in Molecular and Cellular Biology 
An examination of contemporary issues in molecular and cellular biology. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 310 or 320 and consent of instructor. 

BIOL 501: Topics in Ecology & Evolution 
An examination of contemporary issues in ecology and evolution 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Jr/Sr Status 

BIOL 502: Topics in Anatomy & Physiology 
An examination of contemporary issues in anatomy and physiology. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Jr/Sr Status 

BIOL 801: Environmental Studies I 
An interdisciplinary examination of environmental issues with particular attention to impacts affecting communities at local and regional levels. Particular attention will be paid to anthropological, biological, ethical, political and social aspects. 
Credits: 
3 

BIOL 802: Environmental Studies II 
An interdisciplinary examination of environmental issues with particular attention to causal factors and impacts at national and global levels. Particular attention will be paid to anthropological, biological, ethical, political and social aspects. 
Credits: 
3 

MDMI 103: Microbiology w/Lab 
A systematic examination of the microbial world, with an emphasis on pathogens. Topics covered include morphology, physiology, and genetics as well as the metabolic and enzymatic reactions associated 
Credits: 
4 

Chemistry 
CHEM 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
CHEM 001: General and Applied Chemistry 
Specially oriented toward students needing one semester of chemistry. Covers topics in elementary inorganic, organic, and biological chemistry. 
Credits: 
3 

CHEM 002: General and Applied Chemistry Laboratory 
 Designed to teach some of the elementary techniques of experimentation and observation as carried out in a chemical laboratory. 
Credits: 
1 

CHEM 003: General Chemistry and Recitation 
Deals with the fundamental principles of chemistry, the chemical and physical properties of the elements and their most common compounds, and methods of qualitative inorganic analysis. Prerequisite: Students required to take CAR math have to satisfy that requirement before they will be able to enroll in this course. 
Credits: 
4 

CHEM 004: General Chemistry and Recitation 
Lecture course that is a continuation of CHEM 003. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 003 or consent of instructor. 

CHEM 005: General Chemistry Laboratory 
Designed to teach some of the techniques of chemical experimentation, illustrate some of the principles of chemical theory, and develop some skill in the preparation and analysis of chemical substances. 
Credits: 
1 

CHEM 006: General Chemistry Laboratory 
 Continuation of CHEM 005. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 005 

CHEM 084, 085: Directed Readings for Sophomores 
 A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. Honors course. 
Credits: 
1 

CHEM 088, 089: Directed Readings for Juniors 
 A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. Honors course. 
Credits: 
2 

CHEM 092, 093: Special Laboratory Projects. 
Introduction to the use of chemical literature and research methods through experimental work on a research problem. Honors course. 
Credits: 
1 
- 
6 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 122 and CHEM 142. 

CHEM 101: Inorganic Chemistry 
Examination of molecular structure and the application of valence and other theories in the interpretation of inorganic chemical reactions. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 172 or consent of instructor. 

CHEM 102: Advanced Inorganic Chemistry 
Systematic treatment of inorganic chemistry in terms of molecular structure, periodic properties, and current theories of bonding. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 172 or consent of instructor. 

CHEM 105: Techniques of Inorganic Chemistry 
Preparation, purification, and structural analysis of inorganic substances. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 122, CHEM 142, and CHEM 172 or consent of instructor. 

CHEM 122: Analytical Chemistry Lectures 
Treats the principles and techniques of quantitative analysis, with emphasis on both wet and instrumental techniques, statistical analysis of data, homogeneous and heterogeneous equilibria, criteria for a reliable analysis, and capability and limitation of instruments for analytical application. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 004. 

CHEM 123: Analytical Chemistry Laboratory 
Presents experiments covering gravimetric, potentiometric, spectrophotometric, and chromatographic techniques. 
Credits: 
2 

CHEM 126: Instrumental Methods of Analysis—Lecture 
Basic theory and applications of instrumental methods of analysis, including spectroscopy, electroanalytical methods, and chromatography. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 122. 

CHEM 127: Instrumental Methods of Analysis—Laboratory 
Experimental applications of spectroscopy, electroanalytical methods, and chromatography. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 122 and CHEM 123.  

CHEM 131: Advanced Analytical Chemistry 
Examination of the principles and experimental aspects of analytical chemistry on an advanced level. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 122. 

CHEM 132: Introduction to Environmental Chemistry 
Focuses on certain key principles of chemistry that are fundamental for understanding environmental waste problems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 006. 

CHEM 135: Techniques of Analytical Chemistry 
Treatment of basic techniques of analytical chemistry, with emphasis on the underlying theory and methods of its application to the solution of analytical problems; obtaining accurate and reliable data; evaluating sources of error; and interpreting the significance of the results and reporting them in a clear and concise manner. 
Credits: 
2 

CHEM 140: Techniques of Organic Chemistry 
Experimental studies in the isolation, purification, and structure determination of organic compounds, utilizing primarily spectroscopic methods. Six hours a week. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 142 and consent of instructor. 

CHEM 141: Organic Chemistry 
Lecture course analyzing the chemistry of the compounds of carbon. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 004. 

CHEM 142: Organic Chemistry 
Continuation of CHEM 141. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 141. 

CHEM 143: Advanced Organic Chemistry 
Lecture course examining, or an advanced level, the chemistry of certain classes of compounds of carbon. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 142. 

CHEM 144: Physical Organic Chemistry 
Lecture course that correlates the properties of organic molecules with their structure. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 142, CHEM 143, and CHEM 172. 

CHEM 145: Organic Chemistry Laboratory 
Experimental studies in the isolation, purification, and synthesis of organic compounds. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Concurrent enrollment in CHEM 141 or CHEM 142. 

CHEM 148: Polymer Synthesis Lecture 
Designed to introduce the principles of polymer chemistry and methods of polymer synthesis. 
Credits: 
3 

CHEM 149: Polymer Synthesis Laboratory 
 Designed to introduce the techniques of polymer synthesis. 
Credits: 
1 

CHEM 151: Biochemistry I 
Analysis of the chemistry, metabolism, and enzymology of carbohydrates, proteins, fats, and other cellular constituents. May be taken jointly with CHEM 171. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 142. 

CHEM 152: Biochemistry II 
Continuation of CHEM 151. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 151. 

CHEM 156: Biochemistry Survey 
One-semester biochemistry course covering the chemistry and metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids, nucleic acids, and proteins. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 142. 

CHEM 157: Biochemistry Survey Laboratory 
 Experimental studies in the isolation and chemical reactivity of substances of biological interest. 
Credits: 
1 

CHEM 167: Physical Properties of Polymers 
Course provides an understanding of the physical chemical issues involved in the processing and applications of polymers. Emphasis will be on the structural, thermal, mechanical and electro-optical properties of chain molecules. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 171 or equivalent or permission of instructor. 

CHEM 168: Polymer Characterization 
Deals with the basic concepts and techniques used in the characterization of various types of polymers. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 148. 

CHEM 169: Polymer Characterization Laboratory 
 Experimental applications involved in the characterization of polymers. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 149. 

CHEM 171: Physical Chemistry Lecture 
An introduction to thermodynamics and its applications; quantum chemistry including atomic and molecular structure; atomic and molecular spectroscopy. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 004; Physics PHYS 002; and differential and integral calculus. 

CHEM 172: Physical Chemistry Lecture 
Continuation of CHEM 171, including chemical kinetics, catalysis, and photochemistry. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 171. 

CHEM 173: Physical Chemistry Laboratory 
Lecture- laboratory course that includes experimental studies in spectroscopy and molecular structure, properties of gases, and thermodynamics. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 171. 

CHEM 174: Physical Chemistry Laboratory 
Continuation of CHEM 173. 
Credits: 
2 

CHEM 178: Advanced Physical Chemistry 
Comprehensive treatment of some classical and modern physical chemistry topics. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 172. 

CHEM 179: Advanced Physical Chemistry 
Continuation of CHEM 178. 
Credits: 
3 

CHEM 180: Chemistry for the Health Sciences I and Recitation 
Designed for non-chemistry majors in the health sciences and related fields (nutrition, nursing, medical technology, etc.) Deals with basic concepts of General Chemistry and Organic Chemistry. 
Credits: 
4 

CHEM 181: Chemistry for the Health Sciences Laboratory 
 Designed to teach some of the techniques of chemical experimentation, illustrate some of the principles of chemical theory and develop skill in the preparation and analysis of organic and biochemical substances. 
Credits: 
1 

CHEM 182: Chemistry for the Health Sciences II and Recitation 
Lecture course that is a continuation of CHEM 181. Deals with basic concepts of organic chemistry and Biochemistry. Prerequisite CHEM 181. 
Credits: 
4 

CHEM 183: Chemistry for the Health Sciences Laboratory 
 Continuation of CHEM 182. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 182. 

CHEM 184: Computer Programming for Chemists 
Fortran programming, principles of numerical analysis, numerical solution of differential equations and problems in linear algebra, statistics, and probability. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 183 or consent of instructor. 

CHEM 195: Introduction to Atmospheric Chemistry 
General introduction to atmospheric sciences with an emphasis on the chemistry of the earth’s atmosphere. General examination of the current state of knowledge regarding the photochemistry, kinetics, chemical cycling, and evolution of the earth’s atmosphere. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 172 or consent of the instructor.  

CHEM 196: Atmospheric Chemistry 
Advanced treatment of the current theories of chemical evolution and stability of planetary atmospheres with an emphasis on the earth’s atmosphere. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 172, CHEM 195, or consent of the instructor. 

CHEM 197: Planetary Atmospheres 
Continuation of CHEM 296. Treatment of the evolution chemistry, and physics of extraterrestrial and interstellar atmospheres. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 297 or consent of the instructor. 

CHEM 198: Current Topics in Atmospheric Sciences 
Seminar course featuring area scientists whose field of specialty is in atmospheric or space sciences. Representative topics will be acid rain, global warming/cooling, ozone depletion, and air pollution. 
Credits: 
2 

CHEM 199: Atmospheric Radiation I 
Application of radiative transfer theory to problems in planetary atmospheres with emphasis on the earth’s atmosphere. Principles of atomic and molecular spectroscopy, absorption and emission by atmospheric gases, radiation flux and flux divergence computations will be covered. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Physics PHYS 178, Physics PHYS 182, differential and integral calculus. 

CHEM 990: Co-op Chemistry 
The program provides students with the opportunity to develop the academic and professional skills required to pursue employment in these areas, or to continue on to graduate training in an academic field related to Chemistry 
Credits: 
1 
- 
12 

Economics 
ECON 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
BECN 330: Managerial Economics 
Analyzes decision-making in the enterprise. Emphasizes the market environment measurement of the influence of policy and non-policy variables on sales, costs, and profits. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 001, ECON 002, INFO 311. 

ECON 001: Principles of Economics I 
Introduction to macroeconomic analysis and its application to the American economic system. Includes such major topics as the economic role of government, the banking system, the determination and measurement of national income, economic growth, and elements of monetary and fiscal policies. 
Credits: 
3 

ECON 002: Principles of Economics II 
Continuation of Principles I. Considers the problem of scarcity and allocation of resources in a free enterprise economy, with special emphasis on the pricing behavior of business firms and households. 
Credits: 
3 

ECON 084/085: Directed Readings for Sophomores (HONORS) 
Sophomore Honors students undertake a course of independent study of economics under the guidance of one or more faculty advisors. Readings from textbooks, handbooks, monographs, and the scientific periodical literature are assigned in a specific area. (1 hr. each semester .) 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
cumulative GPA of 3.2 

ECON 088/089: Directed Readings for Juniors (Honors) 
Junior Honors students undertake a course of independent studyof economics under the guidance of one or more faculty advisors. Readings from textbooks, handbooks, monographs, and the scientific periodical literature are assigned in a specific area. (1 hr. each semester .) 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
cumulative GPA of 3.2 

ECON 092/093: Senior Departmental (Honors) 
Senior Honors students undertake a course of independent study of economics under the guidance of one or more faculty advisors. Readings from textbooks, handbooks, monographs, and the scientific periodical literature are assigned in a specific area. (1 hr. each semester .) 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
cumulative GPA of 3.2 

ECON 095: Internship 
Opportunity for students to work closely with advisor on research opportunities 
Credits: 
3 

ECON 132: Political Economy 
Examination of the links between economic and political processes, along with an extension of economic theory beyond its traditional boundaries in order to consider the various political processes through which economic processes are either altered or transformed. 
Credits: 
3 

ECON 170: Intermediate Microeconomic Theory 
Study of the price system in a market-oriented economy, with special emphasis given to theories relating to the consumer and firm behavior. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 002 and MATH 026.. 

ECON 171: Intermediate Macroeconomic Theory 
Builds upon the material covered in ECON 001 and examines in greater depth the tools of macroeconomic analysis and how they may be used to analyze the interaction between such macroeconomic variables as private consumption, private investment, public spending, money supply, inflation, and unemployment. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 001; MATH 026. 

ECON 172: Industrial Relations 
General course in labor problems which examines the basic character of the problems involved in the determination and administration of wages. Prerequisite:ECON 002. 
Credits: 
3 

ECON 173: Collective Bargaining, Public Policy 
Deals with the development, analysis, and significance of collective bargaining; labor and employer organization and public policy toward unionism and collective bargaining. 
Credits: 
3 

ECON 174: Labor Law and Social Legislation 
Considers the matter of government intervention in industrial relations and analyzes cases relating to the following areas: criminal conspiracy and other early doctrines, subversive activities, application of the Sherman Act, the legality of economic tactics employed by labor and management, bargaining rights, wage-hour legislation, fair employment practices, and civil rights. 
Credits: 
3 

ECON 175: History of Economic Thought 
Survey of the history of economic thinking from ancient Graeco-Roman economics to the classical school, including criticism and the consequences of their influence upon the evolution of neoclassical doctrines and the development of present economic thought. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 001. 

ECON 177: Growth of the American Economy 
Concerns the process of economic growth from the colonial period to the present day, stressing the interrelationships of changes in various sectors. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 001 and ECON 002. 

ECON 180: Statistics for Business and Economics 
Examines basic statistical methods and their use for economics and business, including averages, measures of dispersion, testing hypotheses, elementary probability theory, index number, time series analysis, and simple correlation, with emphasis placed on descriptive statistics. 
Credits: 
3 

ECON 182: Mathematics for Economics 
Includes calculus, matrix algebra, and maximization problems, with applications for economics problem solving. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 006. 

ECON 183: Mathematical Economics 
Mathematical exposition of the basic theories of economic behavior. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 182 or MATH 026. 

ECON 184: Introduction to Econometrics 
Introduction to econometric theory and techniques. First part of the course deals with theory of the two-variable regression model and technical practices of its application. Extension to a three-variable model illustrated and analyzed. Special topics such as use of lagged and dummy variable, and problems such as multicollinearity, autocorrelation, and hetero-skedasticity are considered. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 181, ECON 183, and MATH 026. 

ECON 185: Labor Economics 
Analysis of institutions concerned with utilization of human resources; the growth, organization, and objectives of management and trade unions; and major labor issues and problems, including those connected with collective bargaining. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 001 and ECON 002. 

ECON 186: Economic Development in Africa 
Survey of economic issues in Africa, including an analysis of the transition to a market economy; the development of trade, industry, and agriculture; and the theory and policy of economic development and planning. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 194. 

ECON 187: Comparative Economic Systems 
Presents the theories, programs, and practices of the principal economic systems, with special reference to countries that are heavily dependent on market mechanisms and to countries that rely strongly upon central command. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 001 and ECON 002. 

ECON 188: The Economics of Black Community Development 
Economic analysis of the problem of rapid technological change under the condition of oligopolistic pricing and the effects upon the well-being of the labor force, with particular reference to the black community. Special attention is given to the problem of economic and financial reorganization of the ghetto economy, together with the problem of shifting to labor-using capital expansion to create employment and raise real income in the black-owned sector. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 001 and ECON 002. 

ECON 189: Industrial Organization 
Examines the organization of American industry under various states of the market, including antitrust cases. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 170 and ECON 171. 

ECON 190: Public Finance 
Designed to acquaint students with the role of the government (federal, state, and local) in the economy. Fundamentally aims to equip students with the prevailing theories and practices of fiscal institutions in our economy, with emphasis on their allocation, distribution, and stabilization functions. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 001. 

ECON 191: International Economics 
Discusses such topics as national specialization and international exchange, the significance of international trade to various countries, financial problems, economic development, and common markets. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 001 and ECON 002. 

ECON 192: International Commercial Policy 
Examines the problems of free trade and protectionism and their changes through history. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 191. 

ECON 193: The Economics of Decision Making 
Concerns decision making in a complex industrial model, the negotiated market model, and the centralized model. The following questions are considered in the different models: Who makes the decisions? For whom and toward what goals are these decisions made? What is the structure of the decision-making hierarchy? How are decisions made? What variables are manipulated in the execution of decisions? 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 170 and ECON 171. 

ECON 194: Theory of Economic Development 
Treats the theories, models, and patterns of economic development of advanced and less developed economies and analyzes the economic and noneconomic variables that influence economic development, including some historical theories and approaches to economic development. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 001 and ECON 002. 

ECON 195: Money and Banking 
Introduction to the study of money, credit, interest rates, and banking, both within and outside of the FRS, with major emphasis on the structure and operations of commercial banks and activities of the FRS. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 001. 

ECON 196: Monetary Analysis 
Designed to acquaint the student with the principles of monetary theory and this application to the economy; examines the theory of money supply and demand and its effects on macroeconomic models. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 195 and ECON 171. 

ECON 197: Economic Problems of Western Europe 
Analysis of the development of the economies of Western Europe with special reference to the period following World War II. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 001. 

ECON 199: Introduction to Urban Economics 
Analysis of the special economic problems of urban regions, e.g., growth and development, a hierarchy within a system of urban regions, housing, transportation, urban poverty, and local public finance. Emphasis is on the economics of the spatial order within and among urban regions. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 001 and ECON 002. 

English 
ENGL 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
 
 
 
ENGL 002: Freshman Composition 
Designed to develop the student’s ability to express ideas clearly and effectively in writing and to read with perception and accuracy. 
Credits: 
3 

ENGL 003: Freshman Composition 
Intended to increase the student’s ability to write effectively, to read critically, and to present ideas logically. 
Credits: 
3 

ENGL 009: Technical Writing, Pre-Professional 
The course focuses on written and oral communication in technical writing.  Students will be required to produce documents encountered within the workplace, especially in a global marketplace. These will include - but not be limited to - correspondence, memos, business reports, collaborative and individual proposals, formal e-mails, argumentative essays, job search strategies, visually appealing brochures, and portfolios. In addition, students will hone communication skills essential to achieving success in the competitive work environment. Prerequisite: successful completion of First Year Writing Sequence (ENGW courses) with grade of or higher. Satisfies 3rd Writing Requirement of COAS 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Prerequisite: successful completion of First Year Writing Sequence (ENGW courses) with grade of  <C> or higher 

ENGL 010: Technical Writing for Pre-Law Students 
This is course is designed to introduce the student to fundamental concepts of legal writing. Whether the career goal is to become an attorney, paralegal, journalist, or corporate executive, success will depend on the ability to think, analyze, and communicate in an effective style.  This course will focus on the exercises and skills necessary to complete a first semester legal research and writing course in law school, including case citation methodology, writing memoranda, and preparing an appellate brief. Prerequisite: successful completion of First Year Writing Sequence (ENGW courses) with grade of  or higher … Satisfies 3rd Writing Requirement of COAS 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Successful completion of First Year Writing Sequence (ENGW courses) with grade of  <C> or higher 

ENGL 014: Introduction to Humanities I 
Introduces students to critical approaches and major texts in the global humanities.  Addresses key foundational texts in the Western classical tradition (Homer, Seneca, Plato, etc.) as well as devote special critical attention to the study of seminal works in other fields.  Students will learn about the fundamental goals and objectives of the global humanities, which later artists and men and women of letters (during the Renaissance period) imitated and applied the traditional classical forms, from the Greeks and Romans, to illustrate what moral values and collective ideals should define the pursuit of knowledge and human experience. 
Credits: 
3 

ENGL 015: Introduction to Humanities II 
This course is  informed by a global record of writers, artists, musicians, poets, etc.  who have influenced generations.  Intro to Humanities I (ENGL 014)  focused on a choice of texts from world’s narrative traditions (archaic Greece to modern America through those of Africa); Humanities II builds and continues this study, but through the texts of the world’s dramatic traditions (drama and ritual).    NOTE: Students do not need to take ENGL 014 to be able to take this course 
Credits: 
3 

ENGL 054: African American Literature to 1940 
Designed to introduce students to the major authors, genres, journals, themes, movements, and debates that have shaped the African American literary tradition -it examines the cultural experiences of  African/African Americans who helped shape the growth of the United States from its earliest beginnings through  the early 1940s. Students will become familiar with the works of the authors, poets, artists, activists, and critical analysts who made an indelible mark in this area of literature, culture, and history. 
Credits: 
3 

ENGL 055: African-American Literature from 1940 to the Present 
This course explores representative texts from the African American literary tradition in a mostly historical/chronological order. As a survey course, it will explore key units and ideas from the African American literary tradition after 1940 through a study of works that think about, describe, create, resist, defy, and/or break various “boundaries.”  Through lectures, readings, and other assignments, students will come to understand the development of African American literary production from the beginning of the 1940s to the present era. 
Credits: 
3 

ENGL 056: Introduction to Caribbean Literature 
This course explores literature produced by Caribbean writers—both locally and across the Caribbean’s diasporas—and ideas that have shaped these writers’ literary output. Critical to this exploration is a consideration of Caribbean history, development, and political/cultural identity.  In addition, it pays attention to major socioeconomic and political forces that have shaped the region, including slavery, colonization, struggles for independence and migration, and examines ways in which these issues have affected Caribbean writers’ literary imagination. NOTE: also satisfies a requirement in the Caribbean Studies minor 
Credits: 
3 

ENGL 075, 076: Composition for Honors 
Honors courses concentrating on the four areas of communication: speaking, reading, writing, and listening. 
Credits: 
3 

ENGL 084: Honors for Sophomores I 
This course provides directed reading for sophomores in the COAS Honors Program as they begin formulating ideas for the Honors Thesis. Students undertake independent reading, research and writing in preparation for the completion of an Honors Thesis.  Restricted/reserved for English majors in the COAS Honors Program. 
Credits: 
1 

ENGL 088: Honors for Juniors I 
This course uses seminar, workshop, and independent study formats to assist junior English majors in the COAS Honors Program to map a senior honors thesis project.  Students will complete short, weekly written assignments and engage in additional reading, discussion, and workshop activities in order to improve their research and writing skills and to hone a senior thesis prospectus. Restricted/reserved for English majors in the COAS Honors Program. 
Credits: 
1 

ENGL 092: Honors for Seniors I 
Provides guidance in completing the research for the Honors Thesis and working toward a first draft. Comparable to Senior Thesis * Prerequisite: in good standing in COAS Honors Program. Restricted/reserved for English majors in the COAS Honors Program            
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Good standing in COAS Honors Program. 

ENGL 104: Sophomore Seminar I: Introduction to English Studies 
Introduces English majors and minors to methodologies of close reading that reveal the rich complexity of literary texts and provide an appreciation of the way those texts signify in relation to their aesthetic, social, and historical contexts. Upon completion of the course, successful students will be in possession of the critical vocabulary, the basic reading and writing skills, and the knowledge of information technologies and library resources essential to an English major or minor. Required for English majors and minors. Prerequisite: successful completion of First Year Writing Sequence (ENGW courses) with grade of  or higher *This course must be taken in residence; no transfer credit will be accepted for this course.  Restricted/Reserved to English Majors or Minors 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Successful completion of First Year Writing Sequence (ENGW courses) with grade of  <C> or higher 

ENGL 105: Sophomore Seminar II: Theories of Interpretation. 
The second part of the required two-semester introductory sequence for English majors and minors, this course is designed to give students guided opportunities to acquire effective methods of writing literary analyses informed by current critical theory, including African-American critical strategies and intellectual discourses. This course must be taken in residence; no transfer credit will be accepted for this course. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 with grade of “C” or higher. 

ENGL 110: Linguistic (and/or Language) Foundations 
Provides foundational knowledge of the principles and methods of language analysis. By the end of this course, successful students will be able to apply this knowledge to the study of human language in general and English in particular and to demonstrate a metalinguistic awareness as it relates to registers and styles and an awareness of the differences between oral and written language and standard and non-standard dialects and grammars. Required for English majors. Prerequisite. ENGL-104 with “C” or higher or concurrent enrollment in ENGL-104. Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 with “C” or higher or concurrent enrollment in ENGL 104. 

ENGL 111: African American Literary Foundations 
Provides a context for understanding African American literary production and critical theory by examining representative African American literary discourses from the colonial period to the present; includes consideration of the contribution of the African American folk tradition to the creative process. Upon completion of this course, successful students will have a foundational knowledge of the deep roots and rich diversity of the literary African American tradition and be able to write about it with clarity, accuracy, and insight. Required for English majors. Prerequisite: ENGL-104 with “C” or higher or concurrent enrollment in ENGL-104.    Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL-104 with “C” or higher or concurrent enrollment in ENGL-104. 

ENGL 112: American Literary Foundations 
Introduces students to the major texts, genres, periods, authors and ideas that make up the literature of what becomes the United States, from its origins to the present. Successful students will leave this course with an appreciation of the continuities and discontinuities of the multi-cultural literary traditions in American writing and an ability to write about it in a clear and informed way. Required for English majors. Prerequisite: ENGL-104 with “C” or higher or concurrent enrollment in ENGL-104. Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL-104 with “C” or higher or concurrent enrollment in ENGL-104 

ENGL 113: British Literary Foundations 
Introduces students to texts exemplary of key moments, movements, and discourses marking the development of the British literary tradition from the medieval era to the modern age, with emphasis on the cultural dynamics and literary modes affecting the literary production of British writers from various cultures who use English to express themselves. Successful students will leave this course with foundational knowledge of texts, authors, and cultural interactions whose significance endures to the present as well as with an ability to write effective, informed literary analyses. Required for English majors. Prerequisite: ENGL-104 with “C” or higher or concurrent enrollment in ENGL-104.  Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL-104 with “C” or higher or concurrent enrollment in ENGL-104 

ENGL 114: College Grammar 
An advanced comprehensive examination of English grammar from traditional, structural, and generative perspectives. By the end of the course, successful students will possess the vocabulary necessary to analyze grammatical functions, be able to do detailed analysis of word classes, phrases, and sentences using a variety of strategies, precisely identify and correct usage problems, and appreciate the rhetorical effects of various language structures. Highly recommended for English Majors and Minors.  Prerequisites: ENGL-104 with “C” or higher. Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors… Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL-104 with “C” or higher 

ENGL 117: Intro Creative Writing Fiction 
Examines the art and craft of fiction writing, explored from the perspective of both writer and reader.  Students will study the elements of successful fiction writing aided by texts about craft as well as published stories and excerpts provided by the instructor and stories created by classmates. Through these examples, they will analyze fiction’s architectural details – including voice, imagery, character, plot, dialogue, narrative, metaphor, description, resolution, etc.  Prerequisite: Completion of First Year Writing Sequence (ENGW courses) with grade of  or higher.  Satisfies a requirement for English Majors with Creative Writing concentration; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  (Note: course does not fulfill a Division A or 3rd Writing Requirement of COAS) 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Completion of First Year Writing Sequence (ENGW courses) with grade of  <C> or higher. 

ENGL 118: Intro to Creative Writing Poetry 
In this class students will produce poetry in various forms. Students will engage in an intense environment with an emphasis on reading, writing, performance and collaboration. Projects may include of a mock anthology of other people’s poetry and a portfolio of individual, original work. Various texts will be used to expose students to a rich body of work by contemporary poets. Students will be expected to read and respond to the texts through critical analysis or creative production. This class does have a performance aspect to it, so students should be prepared to share original readings individually, as well as  participate in a group project. Prerequisite: Completion of First Year Writing Sequence (ENGW courses) with grade of  or higher.   Satisfies a requirement for English Majors with Creative Writing concentration; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective (Note: course does not fulfill a Division A or 3rd Writing Requirement of COAS) 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Completion of First Year Writing Sequence (ENGW courses) with grade of  <C> or higher. 

ENGL 119: Intro to Creative Writing Non-Fiction 
Students will learn the fundamentals of non-fiction writing and crafting a successful personal essay by learning and applying the techniques for self-critique and revisions: will understand the importance of and mechanics for creating realistic characters, captivating details, powerful images, believable dialogue, and, learn to apply formulas using their own lives as the foundation for non-fiction writing.    Prerequisite: Completion of First Year Writing Sequence (ENGW courses) with grade of  or higher.  Satisfies a requirement for English Majors with Creative Writing concentration; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  (Note: course does not fulfill a Division A or 3rd Writing Requirement of COAS) 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Completion of First Year Writing Sequence (ENGW courses) with grade of  <C> or higher. 

ENGL 127: Creative Writing: Fiction 
Focuses on the techniques required in the writing of fiction. English Majors and Minors. Fulfills a requirement for English Majors with Creative Writing concentration Prerequisite. ENGL 117 (Intro to Creative Writing Fiction) with “C” or higher. Satisfies a requirement for English Majors with Creative Writing concentration; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  (Note: course does not fulfill a Division A or 3rd Writing Requirement of COAS) 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 117 (Intro to Creative Writing Fiction) with “C” or higher 

ENGL 128: Creative Writing: Poetry 
Focuses on the techniques required in writing poems in various sub-genres.  English Majors and Minors. Required for English Majors with Creative Writing concentration Prerequisite: ENGL-118 (Intro to Creative Writing Poetry) with “C” or higher. Satisfies a requirement for English Majors with Creative Writing concentration; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  (Note: course does not fulfill a Division A or 3rd Writing Requirement of COAS) 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL-118 (Intro to Creative Writing Poetry) with “C” or higher. 

ENGL 129: The Art of the Essay 
Addresses the theory and practice of expository writing by reading exemplary texts and practicing a variety of organizational strategies. Sections may focus on different specified discourses (Ethnography, Political Rhetoric, Current Events, Cinema, Short Fiction, Poetry). Upon completion of the course, successful students will be able to write engaging essays characterized by stylistic expressiveness and grammatical precision. Prerequisite: successful completion of First Year Writing Sequence (ENGW courses) with grade of  or higher … Satisfies 3rd Writing Requirement of COAS 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Successful completion of First Year Writing Sequence (ENGW courses) with grade of  <C> or higher … 

ENGL 130: Rhetoric: Theory and Practice 
Uses critical analysis of exemplary argumentative writing as well as classical and modern rhetorical theories to teach strategies for writing argumentative or persuasive essays, specifically including those requiring researched evidence. Successful students will be able to deploy a variety of rhetorical strategies to write convincing essays characterized by stylistic finesse and thoughtful, well-researched development. ENGL-114 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL-104 with grade of “C” or higher. Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors…Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL-104 with grade of “C” or higher. 

ENGL 140: Drama Across Cultures 
A cross-cultural genre course. Focuses on understanding the essential features of drama both ancient and modern from a variety of cultures, which may include European, American, African, African American. The successful student will acquire the vocabulary necessary to analyze drama critically, an understanding of the particular meaning drama creates through performance or imagined performance, and the ability to write about it effectively and insightfully. Prerequisite: ENGL-104 with grade of “C” or higher.  Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors…Satisfies the period/cross-cultural genre course requirement for English majors; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL-104 with grade of “C” or higher. 

ENGL 141: Poetry Across Cultures 
 A cross-cultural genre course. From the ritual chants to the epic, from the African praise song to the sonnet, this course focuses on the choices of style and genre that offer specific creative and interpretative possibilities to the poet. Upon completing this course, the successful student understands the essential nature of poetry, the conventions governing a variety of verse forms, as well as the vocabulary necessary to write about poetry with precision and critical acumen. Prerequisite: ENGL-104 with grade of “C” or higher. Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors…Satisfies the period/cross-cultural genre course requirement for English majors; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective    
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL-104 with grade of “C” or higher. 

ENGL 142: Prose Fiction Across Cultures 
A cross-cultural genre course. The course will sample the prose fiction of a wide variety of authors—for example, Aesop, Charles Dickens, Ralph Ellison, Christina Garcia, Chinua Achebe, Toni Morrison—in order to arrive at an essential understanding of the genre and a selection of sub-genres (for example, fable, short story, novel, novella). During this course, the successful student becomes aware of narrative strategies, the conventions governing specific forms (gothic, science fiction, mystery, adventure, romance), as well as the vocabulary to write about prose fiction in a critically illuminating way. Prerequisite: ENGL-104 with grade of “C” or higher.  Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors… Satisfies the period/cross-cultural genre course requirement for English majors; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL-104 with grade of “C” or higher. 

ENGL 180: Third World Lit. Myth and Archetype 
The class will cover how different researchers explain the cause of the recurrence of certain patterns imaginary (myths, archetypes) in the literature and how to analyze them. We will look at the study of the "classics" archetypal criticism and mythcriticism. 
Credits: 
3 

ENGL 201: Major American Author: Langston Hughes 
An advanced course that provides an intensive scholarly study of the texts of a single author (Douglass, Swift, Morrison, Shakespeare, among others) within their formal and cultural contexts; requires a research paper of substantial length (15 page minimum). One major author course is required for English majors; at least one major author will be offered each semester. Successful students will achieve a complex understanding of the canon of one important writer and be able to produce a sophisticated piece of researched literary analysis that takes into account the body of criticism on that writer. The Foundation course (ENGL-111, ENGL-112, or ENGL-113) relevant to the particular author is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105.  Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors… Satisfies the major author requirement for English majors; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 202: Major Author: Shakespeare 
An advanced course that provides an intensive scholarly study of the texts of a single author (Douglass, Swift, Morrison, Shakespeare, among others) within their formal and cultural contexts; requires a research paper of substantial length (15 page minimum). One major author course is required for English majors; at least one major author will be offered each semester. Successful students will achieve a complex understanding of the canon of one important writer and be able to produce a sophisticated piece of researched literary analysis that takes into account the body of criticism on that writer. The Foundation course (ENGL-111, ENGL-112, or ENGL-113) relevant to the particular author is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105.  Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors… Satisfies the major author requirement for English majors; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 204: African American Author 
An advanced course that provides an intensive scholarly study of the texts of a single author (Douglass, Swift, Morrison, Shakespeare, among others) within their formal and cultural contexts; requires a research paper of substantial length (15 page minimum). One major author course is required for English majors; at least one major author will be offered each semester. Successful students will achieve a complex understanding of the canon of one important writer and be able to produce a sophisticated piece of researched literary analysis that takes into account the body of criticism on that writer. The Foundation course (ENGL-111, ENGL-112, or ENGL-113) relevant to the particular author is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105.  Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors… Satisfies the major author requirement for English majors; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 205: African American Playwright 
An advanced course that provides an intensive scholarly study of the texts of a single author (Douglass, Swift, Morrison, Shakespeare, among others) within their formal and cultural contexts; requires a research paper of substantial length (15 page minimum). One major author course is required for English majors; at least one major author will be offered each semester. Successful students will achieve a complex understanding of the canon of one important writer and be able to produce a sophisticated piece of researched literary analysis that takes into account the body of criticism on that writer. The Foundation course (ENGL-111, ENGL-112, or ENGL-113) relevant to the particular author is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105.  Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors… Satisfies the major author requirement for English majors; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 206: Major Author: Octavia Butler 
An advanced course that provides an intensive scholarly study of the texts of a single author (Douglass, Swift, Morrison, Shakespeare, among others) within their formal and cultural contexts; requires a research paper of substantial length (15 page minimum). One major author course is required for English majors; at least one major author will be offered each semester. Successful students will achieve a complex understanding of the canon of one important writer and be able to produce a sophisticated piece of researched literary analysis that takes into account the body of criticism on that writer. The Foundation course (ENGL-111, ENGL-112, or ENGL-113) relevant to the particular author is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105.  Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors… Satisfies the major author requirement for English majors; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 209: British Author 
An advanced course that provides an intensive scholarly study of the texts of a single author (Douglass, Swift, Morrison, Shakespeare, among others) within their formal and cultural contexts; requires a research paper of substantial length (15 page minimum). One major author course is required for English majors; at least one major author will be offered each semester. Successful students will achieve a complex understanding of the canon of one important writer and be able to produce a sophisticated piece of researched literary analysis that takes into account the body of criticism on that writer. The Foundation course (ENGL-111, ENGL-112, or ENGL-113) relevant to the particular author is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105.  Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors… Satisfies the major author requirement for English majors; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 210: Early African American Literature 
An advanced course that examines African American literature from its earliest beginnings to the texts of the first decades of the twentieth century. ENGL-111 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors… Satisfies the period/cross-cultural genre requirement for English majors; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 211: African-American Realism, Naturalism, and Modernism 
An advanced course that examines African American literature from the Harlem Renaissance to the 1960s, including but not limited to texts written by authors of the Harlem Renaissance, as well as Hayden, Brooks (early), Petry, Ellison, Wright, Baldwin, and Hansberry. ENGL-111 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105.  Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors Satisfies the period/cross-cultural genre requirement for English majors; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 212: African-American Literature from the Black Arts Movement to the Present 
An advanced course that examines African American literature from the Black Arts Movement of the late 1960s to contemporary writing. ENGL-111 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105.   Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors Satisfies the period/cross-cultural genre requirement for English majors; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105 

ENGL 213: African American Drama 
An advanced course that surveys the development of African American drama. ENGL-111 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105.  Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
NGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 214: African American Poetry 
An advanced course that analyzes the poetry and poetics of major African American writers. ENGL-111 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105.  Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors … Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
NGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 215: African American Fiction 
Analysis of the prose fiction genre as practiced by African American writers. ENGL-111 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105.   Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors… Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 216: Folklore of the African Diaspora 
Examines oral traditions of the African Diaspora with attention to cultural and historical contexts. ENGL-111 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105.   Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors … Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 217: African Literature 
A selective survey of the literature of continental Africa, from ancient oral epics, tales, and poems to the postcolonial prose fiction, drama, and poetry of the past four decades. Readings will include works by authors such as Leopold Senghor, Amos Tutuola, Chinua Achebe, Wole Soyinka, Ngugi wa Thiong'o, Okot p'Bitek, Mariama Ba, Buchi Emecheta and Alex LaGuma. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105 … Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors… Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 218: Ethnic American Literature 
This course introduces students to ethnic American literature, music and film, focusing on U.S. Latinx, Asian American and African American cultures. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105.  Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors… Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 225: Modern Caribbean Literature 
Introduction to the literature of the Caribbean people, and its historical, cultural, and social contexts. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors or students in the Interdisciplinary Caribbean Studies Minor … Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective; satisfies a requirement in the Interdisciplinary Caribbean Studies minor 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 226: Caribbean Author 
An advanced course that examines the writings and cultural contexts of a single Caribbean author in depth. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105.   Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors or students in the Interdisciplinary Caribbean Studies minor. … Satisfies the major author requirement for English majors; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective; Fulfills an elective for the Interdisciplinary Caribbean Studies minor.  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105.  

ENGL 227: Caribbean Genre 
An advanced course that looks at one of the genres used by Caribbean authors, such as prose fiction, poetry, drama, autobiography, or hybrid modes based in folk form and orality. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105.  Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors and students in the Interdisciplinary Caribbean Studies minor. … Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective; Fulfills an elective for the Interdisciplinary Caribbean Studies minor.  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 228: Language in the Caribbean 
Introduces students to the complex language formations in the Caribbean, by examining the origin, development and structures of Caribbean creoles, their relationship to European and African languages, and their social, cultural, and political contexts. ENGL-114 or ENGL-110 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105.  Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors …Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 230: Early American Writings to Romanticism 
An intensive examination of writing in America from the time of European colonization to the early days of independent nationhood as the United States. By closely examining the literary production of colonizers, indigenous people, clerics, promoters, zealots, and “others,” successful students will achieve an understanding of the hybrid nature of American literature as well as specific knowledge of important canonical and non-canonical texts. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105.   Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors … Satisfies period/cross-cultural genre course requirement for English majors; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105 

ENGL 231: American Realism and Naturalism 
Examines the efforts of both Black and White writers in the late nineteenth century to form a literature expressive of the “New America” resulting from the revolutionary changes brought about by Emancipation, Reconstruction, industrialization, immigration, and urbanization. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105.   Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors… Satisfies the period/cross-cultural genre course requirement for English majors; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 232: Twentieth and Early Twenty-first Century American Literature 
Addresses the impact of wars, economic depression, racial conflict, changing gender definitions, views of religion, and other historical shifts that produced the distinctive writings of such authors as Faulkner, Hemingway, McCullers, Steinbeck, Welty, O’Connor, Ellison, Baldwin, Morrison, and others. ENGL-112 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105…  Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors… Satisfies the period/cross-cultural genre course requirement for English majors; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 233: Genres in American Literature: Graphic Novel 
A specialized course that can either be a survey of a broad genre, like poetry or drama, or an examination of a particular sub-genre, such as detective fiction, captivity narrative, Theater of the Absurd, the Western epic, poems of Native Americans, etc. ENGL-112 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 234: Genres in American Literature 
A specialized course that can either be a survey of a broad genre, like poetry or drama, or an examination of a particular sub-genre, such as detective fiction, captivity narrative, Theater of the Absurd, the Western epic, poems of Native Americans, etc. ENGL-112 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 235: Genres in American Literature 
A specialized course that can either be a survey of a broad genre, like poetry or drama, or an examination of a particular sub-genre, such as detective fiction, captivity narrative, Theater of the Absurd, the Western epic, poems of Native Americans, etc. ENGL-112 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 241: Early Modern British Literature 
Examines the cultural-literary developments from the Medieval Period to the advent of printing, continuing through the English Civil War in the mid-seventeenth century. Includes writers such as Margery Kempe, Geoffrey Chaucer, Queen Elizabeth, Christopher Marlowe, and William Shakespeare. Religious controversy, early feminist discourse, theories of government, and the impact of imperialism are themes that may be treated. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105… Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors … Satisfies the period/cross-cultural genre course requirement for English majors; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective    
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 242: The Age of Revolution: British Literature 1660-1800 
Focuses on the changes British literature resulting from the emergence of a print culture in England that empowered new categories of writers (middle class citizens, women and Africans) and promoted for new literary genres (novel, periodical essay, biography, and autobiography).   ENGL 113strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors ONLY …Satisfies the period/cross-cultural genre course requirement for English majors; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 243: British Romantic Sensibilities 
Study of major issues and debates in English life and culture reflected in the literature of the first half of the nineteenth century. English 113 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors… Satisfies the period/cross-cultural genre course requirement for English majors; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 244: Victorian Life and Literature 
Study of major discourses and their participants in British literature from 1832 to 1901. ENGL 113 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors…Satisfies the period/cross-cultural genre course requirement for English majors; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 245: Modern and Post-Colonial British Literature 
Study of major writers and significant trends in British writing from 1901 to the present, with special emphasis on writing by Black Britons. ENGL 113 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors …Satisfies the period/cross-cultural genre course requirement for English majors; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 246: Genres in British Literature: Drama 
May focus on historical surveys of the development of broad genres, like drama or prose fiction, or may focus on specialized topics such as The Jacobean Revenge Play, The Post-Colonial Novel, Abolitionist Poetry, or Afro-British Playwrights. ENGL-113 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors  …Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective    
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 247: Genres in British Literature; Drama 
May focus on historical surveys of the development of broad genres, like drama or prose fiction, or may focus on specialized topics such as The Jacobean Revenge Play, The Post-Colonial Novel, Abolitionist Poetry, or Afro-British Playwrights. ENGL-113 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105…   Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors. Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective    
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 248: Genres in British Literature 
May focus on historical surveys of the development of broad genres, like drama or prose fiction, or may focus on specialized topics such as The Jacobean Revenge Play, The Post-Colonial Novel, Abolitionist Poetry, or Afro-British Playwrights. ENGL-113 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105…   Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors  …Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective    
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
NGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 250: Comparative Literature 
Introduction to the history, theory, and practice of comparative literature, with attention to such topics as literary movements, genre formation, constructions of gender, interdisciplinary relations. Focusing on major texts, the course develops abilities to do comparative analysis. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors … Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective      
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 261-263: Topics in Linguistics 
The course explores various topics in linguistics, such as American English Dialects, African American Vernacular English, Forensic Linguistics, Narrative Analysis, Language and Social Media ENGL-110 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105…   Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors …Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 271-273: Topics in Literary Criticism 
The course explores various topics in linguistics, such as American English Dialects, African American Vernacular English, Forensic Linguistics, Narrative Analysis, Language and Social Media ENGL-110 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105…   Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors …Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 280-289: Topics in Literature and Writing 
Some of the possibilities for special literary topics include “Women Writers,” “The Bible as Literature,” “The Blues and Literature”; interdisciplinary studies linking music or art with literature; or an intensive study of one major text like Invisible Man, Paradise Lost, Gulliver's Travels, or Their Eyes were Watching God. Possibilities for special topics in writing might include Ethnographic Writing, Advanced Argumentation, Persuasive Rhetoric, and so forth. Taught at an advanced level, these courses require extensive research. Prerequisite is the successful completion of First Year Writing Sequence (ENGW courses) with grade of  or higher.   Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective   (Note: these courses do not satisfy a Division A or 3rd Writing Requirement of COAS 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Successful completion of First Year Writing Sequence (ENGW courses) with grade of  <C> or higher.  

ENGL 290: Principles of Editing 
An advanced writing course. Teaches students to edit writing produced by themselves or others by employing strategies from linguistics, rhetoric, and literature; introduces students to professional proofreading symbols. By the end of the term, successful students will be able to identify ineffective strategies or styles and know how to correct them. ENGL-110 or ENGL-114 is strongly recommended. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105   Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors … Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105 

ENGL 291: Writing Critical Reviews 
An advanced writing course that considers the critical review as a genre. Develops the skills necessary to write reviews of contemporary literary, film, or dramatic performances; emphasizes critical writing and artistic appreciation and evaluation; includes exemplary and theoretical readings. Attendance at performances may be required. Prerequisite: ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105…Restricted/Reserved for English Majors or Minors …Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 104 and 105 (with grade of “C” or higher), or ENGL 104 with <C> or higher WITH concurrent enrollment in ENGL 105. 

ENGL 293: Teaching English in Secondary School 
Students will be exposed to theoretical studies and practical application of a variety of approaches to the teaching of genre, writing, grammar, and language history at the secondary level. Course activities reflect the current emphasis on the use of technology in the classroom as well as on the role of the teacher as researcher. Requirements include the preparation of lesson plans, visits to classes in designated local secondary schools, and culminating written projects. Designed for juniors and seniors who will be student teaching. Prerequisites: Students must have completed at least 90 credits of course work (having passed first-year writing courses with a grade of C or better)  Restricted/ Reserved for English Majors or Minors … 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Prerequisites: Students must have completed at least 90 credits of course work (having passed first-year writing courses with a grade of C or better) 

ENGL 295: Creative Writing Workshop 
An advanced course that develops the student’s creative writing abilities in a workshop setting. Portfolio submission required. Prerequisite: Completion of ENGL 127 with or higher.  Required for English Majors with Creative Writing concentration; Satisfies an English Major/Minor elective  
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Completion of ENGL 127 with <C> or higher. 

ENGL 296: Senior Thesis 
Provides an opportunity for independent research; offers experience in writing a lengthy researched essay on a literary topic or creative work. Satisfies an English major/minor requirement *Note: English majors in the COAS Honors Program may substitute ENGL 296  for ENGL 092 (Directed Honors for Seniors) with approval from the Program Director. 
Credits: 
3 

ENGL 297: Internship Practicum 
Provides guidance and evaluation for students working in internships. Students will reflect on their work experiences in consultation with a faculty advisor.  This course is asks students to reflect on their work experiences and to develop a professional plan for their future careers.  This course requires students to keep an active work log of at least 6 entries detailing their work experiences, and it requires a final reflection essay that addresses the internship’s significance to the students’ professional aspirations. Prerequisites: Students must have completed at least 90 credits of course work (having passed first-year writing courses with a grade of C or better) and must have secured an internship. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Students must have completed at least 90 credits of course work (having passed first-year writing courses with a grade of C or better) and must have secured an internship. 

ENGL 298: Concentration in Creative Writing Thesis 
The course is the culmination of a student’s Concentration in Creative Writing. The students will produce a complete manuscript of their creative work: approximately 50 pages of either poetry, fiction, creative non-fiction, or a hybrid mixed genre manuscript (inclusive of the prerequisite pages). Prerequisite: ENGL 295 and a portfolio of original creative work (25 pages). Required for English majors with the Creative Writing concentration IMPORTANT NOTE: English majors declaring the Creative Writing concentration prior to Fall 2021, may substitute ENGL 296 (Senior Thesis) for ENGL 298, to satisfy this requirement  
Credits: 
3 

ENGW 101: Rhetoric, Inquiry & Critical Writing 
This course fulfills the first semester writing course requirement for First-Year Writing.  This course introduces students to  rhetoric as a critical approach to writing, in addition to specific principles and conventions of expository writing. English Writing 101 stresses critical thinking, the exploration of ideas, and provides instruction in organization, grammatical correctness, and encourages discussion of contemporary issues through writing.  NOTE: Upon completion of this course students should register for ENGW 103.  Successful completion of this First Year Writing course requires a grade of  or higher. 
Credits: 
3 

ENGW 102: Expository Writing & Literacy Studies 
The first course of the two-semester required writing course requirement for First-Year Writing.  This course introduces  students to  rhetoric as a critical approach to writing, in addition to specific principles and conventions of expository writing. English Writing 102 stresses critical thinking, the exploration of ideas, and the development of voice in writing. Students will be expected to engage in discussion of contemporary issues through class discussion and their writing.  NOTE: Upon completion of this course students should register for ENGW 103.  Successful completion of this First Year Writing course requires a grade of  or higher 
Credits: 
3 

ENGW 103: Persuasive Writing & Research 
The second course of the two-semester required writing course requirement for First-Year Writing.  This course builds on the  study of rhetoric begun in ENGW 101 or 102, and introduces students to  argumentation and persuasive writing techniques, in addition to the conventions of academic research. English Writing 103 stresses the examination of counter-arguments, the exploration of primary and secondary sources, and familiarity with academic style conventions. Students will be expected to engage in discussion of contemporary issues through class discussion and their writing.  Prerequisite: Successful completion of ENGW 101 or 102 with a grade of  or higher. Note: Successful completion of this First Year Writing course requires a grade of  or higher. 
Credits: 
3 

ENGW 104: Writing, Literacy & Discourse 
The first course of the two-semester required writing course requirement for First-Year Writing with an emphasis on Writing Studies.  This course introduces students to the field of Writing Studies, an area of study that focuses on the production, circulation, and values of academic and other forms of writing.  English Writing 104 emphasizes examination of theories about writing, as well as a deep understanding of the writing process and certain forms of professional writing. Students will be expected to engage in discussion of contemporary issues and to develop a digital portfolio as a capstone project for the course.  NOTE: Upon completion of this course students should register for ENGW 105. NOTE: Successful completion of this First Year Writing course requires a grade of  or higher. 
Credits: 
3 

ENGW 105: Reflective Writing and Portfolios 
This  second course of a two-semester required writing course requirement for First-Year Writing.  This course builds on the  study of writing begun in ENGW 104 and introduces students to  the habits of mind employed by season writers of all professions. Additionally, this course emphasizes the conventions of academic research and stresses the self-examination and  the exploration of professional writing conventions as well as the philosophy of writing. Students will be expected to engage in discussion of contemporary issues through class discussion and to develop a digital portfolio as a capstone project for the course. Prerequisite: Successful completion of ENGW 104 with a grade of  or higher. NOTE: Successful completion of this First Year Writing course requires a grade of  or higher. 
Credits: 
3 

History 
HIST 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
 
HIST 001: Introduction to the Study of Civilization I 
The study of civilizations, their institutions and social processes. Open to freshmen. Divisional Studies B. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 002: Introduction to the Study of Civilization II 
Continuation of HIST 001. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 003: Introduction to History 
Course designed to introduce the beginning student to the skills and challenges involved in the disciplined study of the past. Mandatory for history majors and minors. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 005: Introduction to the Black Diaspora I 
Surveys the African background and linkage of people of African descent who have inhabited areas of the world outside of Africa and compares their respective cultural, economic, political and social experiences and activities down to the ending of slavery in the Americas in the 19th century. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 006: Introduction to the Black Diaspora II 
Continuation of HIST 005 from the late 19th century to the present. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 009: United States History to 1877 
Presents the principal political, economic, social, and cultural developments in U.S. history from the American Revolution to the end of Reconstruction. Required of all history majors. Divisional Studies C. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 010: United States History Since 1877 
Continuation of HIST 009. Required of all history majors. Divisional Studies C. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 011: Blacks in Latin America 
Culture, history, politics, and identity of African Americans in Spanish and Lusophone Caribbean, South America, and Central America. Exploration of issues of identity in context of Afro/Latino migration to U.S. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 012: Public History, Memory, and Heritage of Slavery 
Course provides an in-depth study and analysis of the institution of slavery as it developed in the United States. Particular focus will be placed on the institution from the perspective of the slaves themselves. Topics include the Atlantic Slave Trade, Origins of Slavery, Colonial Slave Systems, Proslavery Defense, Abolitionism, Slave Culture, Resistance, and Emancipation. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 013: American Military Experience to 1865 
Examines the American military's evolution from its infancy through the end of the Civil War. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 014: American Military Experience since 1865 
Examines the American military's evolution since 1865. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 015: Colloquium: Abolitionist Dissent in America and England 
Explores the abolitionist movement and dissent in America and England and its impact on slavery and the slave trade. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 017: Slavery & Law 
This course explores the interaction of law, race, and slavery in America, with an emphasis on the U.S. South. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 030: Introduction to African History I 
Study of the origins and development of African societies from the earliest times to about 1800. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 031: Introduction to African History II 
Continuation of HIST 030 to the present. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 032: Colloquium in European History 
  Instructor-guided instruction focused on the course topic.  Students are required to complete a significant research paper or project. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 034: Colloquium: 19th Century US History 
Instructor-guided instruction focused on the course topic.  Students are required to complete a significant research paper or project. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 035: Colloquium: 20th Century US History 
Instructor-guided instruction focused on the course topic.  Students are required to complete a significant research paper or project. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 036: Colloquium in US Foreign Policy 
Instructor-guided instruction focused on the course topic.  Students are required to complete a significant research paper or project. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 037: Colloquium: Public History 
Instructor-guided instruction focused on the course topic.  Students are required to complete a significant research paper or project. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 040: Introduction to the History of Latin American and Caribbean I 
A survey of Latin American and Caribbean history from Columbus to the present that addresses key historical issues: conquest, colonialism, independence, racial relations, dependency, economic development, urbanization, militarism, nationalism and relations with the United States. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 041: Introduction to the History of Latin America and Caribbean II 
A continuation of HIST 040. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 042: Colloquium on Comparative Slavery 
Instructor-guided instruction focused on the course topic.  Students are required to complete a significant research paper or project. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 043: Colloquium on Music, Resistance, and the Black Diaspora 
Instructor-guided instruction focused on the course topic.  Students are required to complete a significant research paper or project. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 044: Colloquium in the Diaspora 
Instructor-guided instruction focused on the course topic.  Students are required to complete a significant research paper or project. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 047: Colloquium on the History of Brazil 
Instructor-guided instruction focused on the course topic.  Students are required to complete a significant research paper or project. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 048: Colloquium in African History 
Instructor-guided instruction focused on the course topic.  Students are required to complete a significant research paper or project. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 050: Introduction to European History I 
European history from the close of the Napoleonic Wars to the turn of the century, a period in which Europe was at the height of its wealth and power. Particular attention will be paid to the major powers. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 051: Introduction to European History II 
European history from the turn of the century through the two world wars. Particular attention will be paid to the major powers in this period when Europe declined from its preeminent position. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 056: Topics in European History 
 Specialized approaches to history per the course title. Topics will vary. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 070: Afro-American Film & Archives 
Examines the history and theory of African American filmmaking, introducing central political and aesthetic debates by way of different cinematic eras, genres, and filmmakers. Focuses primarily on black directors and producers independent and commercial contexts as they confront popular representations of U.S. blackness in their own cinematic practice. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 071, 074, 075, 076: Topics in History 
Specialized approaches to history per the course title. Topics will vary. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 072: Topics: Africans in Latin America 
Specialized approaches to history per the course title. Topics will vary. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 073: Topics: 20th Century West Indies 
Specialized approaches to history per the course title. Topics will vary. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 077: Topics in History 
Specialized approaches to history per the course title. Topics will vary. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 081: Introduction to Historiography 
Required course for history majors which introduces historical theory, methodology and practice. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 082: Senior Colloquium 
Relates the information acquired by students in specific courses by applying the comparative approach to a variety of issues central to the discipline of history. (Required of all history majors.) 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 084: Directed Readings for Sophomores (Honors Program Only) 
 Intensive readings of representative works in major fields of history. 
Credits: 
1 

HIST 085: Directed Readings for Sophomores (Honors Program Only) 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
1 

HIST 088: Directed Readings for Juniors (Honors Program Only) 
 Intensive readings of representative works in major fields of history. 
Credits: 
1 

HIST 089: Directed Readings for Juniors (Honors Program Only) 
 Continuation of HIST 088. 
Credits: 
1 

HIST 092: Senior Departmental Honors (Honors Program Only) 
Requires a major research paper to be drawn from intensive readings on a specific problem or issue. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 093: Senior Departmental Honors (Honors Program Only) 
Continuation of HIST 092 
Credits: 
1 

HIST 096: Internship in Public History 
Supervised participation in an office or agency concerned with the development of public history. Designed for students preparing for careers in public history. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 097: Internship in History (online) 
 An internship is an intensive career-oriented work experience related to the student’s academic studies, professional and educational goals. It is also an opportunity to gain practical experience in one’s major field of study, apply knowledge gained in the classroom, and make useful contacts in a professional field. The experience is ideally unique to the student and must be supervised by a qualified supervisor.  The student's participation will be virtual. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 101: World Geography 
Provides a background to other intensive studies of the earth’s regions, climate, soils, vegetation, population, and economic and political factors. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 102: Economic Geography 
Analyzes the distribution of the world’s economic activities, centers of primary production; and the geographic factors of transportation, trade, industry, and commerce. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 103: Historical Geography of North America 
This course is designed to introduce the student to the history  of North America from a geographic perspective.  
Credits: 
3 

HIST 104: Historical Geography of Europe 
This course is designed to introduce the student to the history of Europe from a geographic perspective. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 105: Political Geography 
This course provides an overview of the field of political geography by introducing students to its key concepts and how these have shaped the development of this subdiscipline. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 107: Sustainable Cities 
This course examines major challenges faced by urban areas around the world  over time and the potential impact these challenges will have on their sustainability.  
Credits: 
3 

HIST 108: The Supreme Court, Race, and Civil Rights 
This course examines Supreme Court Decisions within the historical context of race and civil rights in the United States. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 109: United States Constitutional History to 1865 
Examination of the origins and development of the federal Constitution within the framework of American political, social, economic, and intellectual developments. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 110: United States Constitutional History Since 1865 
Study of the evolution and interpretation of the Constitution as influenced by political, social, economic, and intellectual developments since the Civil War. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 111: United States Foreign Relations to 1914 
Exploration of the patterns and principles of American foreign relations as influenced by both domestic and international developments. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 112: United States Foreign Relations Since 1914 
Treats the role of the United States as a world power and the socioeconomic and political forces and values underlying that role. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 119: History of the United States South to 1877 
Depicts the emergence of the South as a distinctive region with special economic, political, and social interests. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 120: History of the United States South Since 1877 
Explores the economic, social, and political aspects of the South and its relation to the nation after the Civil War. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 121: History of Colonial America 
Deals with the factors and problems of colonial settlement; imperial control; and the social, economic, and political growth of the colonies. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 122: The American Revolution & Early National Period 
The course covers American history during the War for Independence, focusing on factors that prompted separation of the colonies from Great Britain, on the role of Christianity in the resistance and independence movements, and on the nature and genius of the American constitutional system of government. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 123: The Jacksonian Era, Reform, and Sectionalism 
Treats the rise of nationalism, westward expansion, the changing economy, the emergence of sectionalism, and reform movements during the Jacksonian era. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 124: The Civil War and Reconstruction 
Study of the causes, leaders, and military campaigns of the Civil War and social, economic, and political developments from 1850 to 1877. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 125: Politics, Industrialization, and Reform, 1877-1920 
Study of populists, imperialism, progressives, and reform movements in general, with special emphasis on big business and politics and industrialism. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 126: The United States Since World War I 
Examination of the changing American social, political, economic, and cultural scene, with special emphasis on the impact of the progressive tradition since World War I. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 127: U.S. Reform Movements 
Examination of major social and political reforms in the United States to the present. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 128: History of Women in American Society to 1890 
Analysis of the participation and changing status of women in American institutional and cultural life. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 129: History of Women in American Society Since 1890 
Continuation of HIST 128. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 130: East Africa to 1800 
Examines the civilizations of Ethiopia, the Sudan, and the coast of East Africa, along with inland population movements from ancient times to the end of the eighteenth century. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 131: East Africa Since 1800 
Continuation of HIST 130 to the present. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 132: Central Africa to 1800 
Study of the social, economic, and political development and institutions of the peoples of Central Africa. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 133: Central Africa Since 1800 
Continuation of HIST 132. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 134: West Africa to 1800 
Analysis of the West African states from ancient times to the end of the eighteenth century. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 135: West Africa Since 1800 
Continuation of HIST 134 to the present. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 136: Southern Africa to 1910 
Treats the social, economic, and political development and institutions of South Africa. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 137: Southern Africa Since 1910 
Continuation of HIST 136. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 138: North Africa and the Maghreb to 1800 
Study of the social, economic, and political development and institutions of North Africa. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 139: North Africa and the Maghreb Since 1800 
Continuation of HIST 138. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 140: Caribbean History to 1838 
Patterns of political and social changes in the Caribbean region, 1600-1838. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 141: Caribbean History Since 1838 
Patterns of political and social changes in the Caribbean region, 1838 to present. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 142: Latin History to 1825 
Study of the settlement, colonial institutions and society, and early 19th-century problems in Latin America and the Caribbean. Divisional Studies C. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 143: Latin History Since 1825 
This course  describes and analyzes broad trends in Latin American History since 1825. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 144: History of Mexico & Central America 
Examines the history of Mexico and  Central America Indian civilizations of the remote past to the social conflicts of the present. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 145: History of Brazil 
Latin America's largest and most populous nation is the subject of this course. Themes include the evolution of Brazil's multiethnic society, the struggle for economic development, and the search for a viable political regime. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 146: Twentieth-Century Cuba 
This course examines Cuba's social, economic, cultural, and political history. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 147: African American Women in U.S. History 
Survey of the social, intellectual, economic, political, and cultural history of women in the U.S. from the colonial era to the present. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 148: African American Women in the U.S. History II 
Analysis of the participation of women of African descent in American institutional and cultural life. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 149: District of Columbia History 
Introduction to the major metropolitan questions, past and present, analyzing social and economic forces to physical changes. Selections from texts developed by scholarly and community-based literature. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 150: Europe to 1815 
Concentrated study of the political, social, and economic development of the European states. Recommended for area majors or comparative history majors. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 151: Europe Since 1815 
Continuation of HIST 150. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 152: Seminar on the African Diaspora 
An instructor-led course, usually credit-bearing, with a small number of students collectively exploring the course topic. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 153: Seminar on United States History 
Continuation of HIST 152 with emphasis on the Soviet Union. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 154: Seminar in European History 
An instructor-led course, usually credit-bearing, with a small number of students collectively exploring the course topic. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 157: Seminar in Public History 
An instructor-led course, usually credit-bearing, with a small number of students collectively exploring the course topic. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 157: Seminar in Public History 
An instructor-led course, usually credit-bearing, with a small number of students collectively exploring the course topic. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 158: Seminar in Latin America & the Carribean 
An instructor-led course, usually credit-bearing, with a small number of students collectively exploring the course topic. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 159: Seminar in African History 
An instructor-led course, usually credit-bearing, with a small number of students collectively exploring the course topic. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 161: Seminar: Sex, Gender, & Power in Making the Atlantic World 
An instructor-led course, usually credit-bearing, with a small number of students collectively exploring the course topic. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 164: African Economic History 
Explores various factors influencing African economic behavior and development from earliest times to the present. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 165: Geography of North America 
Examines the physical base and human occupancy of major geographic regions of the United States and Canada. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 167: Geography of South America 
Discusses the principal regions of South America and the geographic aspects of current national and international questions. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 168: Geography of Europe 
Discusses the principal regions of Europe and the geographic aspects of current national and international questions. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 169: Geography of Asia 
Natural regions, their present economic development and potentialities. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 170: Global Warming 
Examines the worldwide global warming phenomenon and its influence on the past, present, and future. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 171: Geography of Africa 
Natural regions, physical and human resources of Africa south of the Sahara, economic development and political potentialities. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 176: AFRO American History to 1877 
Brief survey of the African background and the social, cultural, economic, and political activity of the black people in the United States. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 177: AFRO American History Since 1877 
Continuation of HIST 176. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 178: Colloquium: African Americans and the State 
Instructor-guided instruction focused on the course topic.  Students are required to complete a significant research paper or project. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 179: Colloquium: The Rights of Citizenship in American History 
Instructor-guided instruction focused on the course topic.  Students are required to complete a significant research paper or project. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 180: Seminar: Reparations & the Law 
An instructor-led course, usually credit-bearing, with a small number of students collectively exploring the course topic. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 181: Human Rights History 
Explores the history and definition of  human rights'  perspectives, advocacy, and interpretation within multiple contexts. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 182: From Slavery to Mass Incarceration 
Explores the relationship between slavery and mass incarceration within the context of US  history. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 183: Constitutional Law and Public Policy 
This course surveys the history of both the U.S. Constitution and its relationship to construction of public policy. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 184: Early Modern Europe I 
Covers the transition from medieval to modern Europe; the Italian Renaissance; development of the arts and sciences; exploration and discovery; the rise of Protestantism and the Catholic reaction; and the religious wars to 1648. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 185: Early Modern Europe II 
Continuation of HIST 184. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 188: State & Empires of Pre-Colonial Africa 
An examination of pre-colonial Africa. Focus on population and interaction, state formation, trade in sub-Saharan Africa, and on impact of external influences such as Christianity and Islam 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 189: Public History 
A survey of the rich variety of interrelated research activities which constitute the practice of public history. Particular attention given to African Americans’ influence on the field. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 190: Public History and Public Policy 
Study, analysis, and comparison of selected revolutionary and liberation movements. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 191: Public History, Memory, and Heritage of Slavery 
Continuation of HIST 190. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 192: Islam in Africa 
Emphasizes the diffusion of Islam in Africa and significance of Islam in African societies. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 193: History of Pan-Africanism 
Analyses of the origin and significance of Pan-Africanism in the United States, the Caribbean and Latin America. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 195: Race Relations in Latin America and the Caribbean 
Introduction to the broad conception of nationalism, politics and revolution in Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 196: Geography of Trade and Transportation 
Geographic determinants of international trade; commercial land, water, and air transportation of world export and import commodities. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 199: Geography of the Black Diaspora 
This course explores the Black Diaspora through a geographic lens by focusing on how place and region shaped the experiences and analysis of Black people as a global racial community/construct. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 700: Introduction to the Black Diaspora II, Writing 
A writing intensive course surveying the African Diaspora from the late nineteenth century to the present. Cannot be taken with HIST 006. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 702: Russia Since 1917, Writing 
A writing intensive course emphasizing the Soviet Union. This course also examines the break up of the Soviet empire. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 703: US History to 1877 - Writing/Online 
Examines the growth of the United Staten, emphasizing major interpretative problems in America's social, economic, political and cultural experience through 1877. Demonstrating advanced writing skills is an integral part of this upper level course. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 704: African American History Since 1877, Writing 
A writing intensive course surveying African American social, cultural, economic and political activity. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 705: United States History Since 1877, Writing 
A writing intensive course presenting the principal political, economic, social, and cultural developments in the United States from the end of Reconstruction to the present. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 745: Colloquium in History of Brazil (Writing Course) 
Instructor-guided instruction focused on the course topic.  Students are required to complete a significant research paper or project. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 747: African American Women - US History, Online 
An historical examination of black women's experiences in U.S. from antebellum era to present. 
Credits: 
3 

HIST 750: Modern Europe to 1815 - Writing 
This course offers a broad survey of modern European history, from the end of the Thirty Years’ War to the aftermath of World War II. Demonstrating advanced writing skills is an integral part of this upper level course. 
Credits: 
3 

Allied Health Education 
AHCC 
AHCC 003: Medical Terminology 
This course incorporates Medical Language for Modern Health Care that uses Contextual Learning Theory to introduce medical terminology within a healthcare environment. The information presented introduces and defines terminology through the context of A &P, pathology, and clinical and diagnostic procedures/tests. The course offers contextual content, a Word Analysis and Definition Table, and exercises all in one place. Word Analysis and Definition Tables provide a color-coded guide to word parts and combining forms, as well as definitions and pronunciations. With unfolding patient case studies and documentation, students are introduced to various roles in the healthcare environment, illustrating the real-life application of medical terminology in modern health care while facilitating active learning. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
AHCC 110 registration 

AHCC 110: General Orientation 
General introduction to Majors in Allied Health. 
Credits: 
2 

AHCC 201: Community Health 
Community Health Nursing emphasizes care of the client/client system utilizing community health services in a variety of home and agency settings. The student is introduced to professional aspects of nursing in the community including historical developments and nursing practice, legal and ethical issues, strategies, and tools for promoting health, nursing care of at-risk aggregates across the life span, and issues and concerns in community health nursing 
Credits: 
3 

AHCC 202: Computer for Allied Health Professions 
This course is designed to offer computer literacy and management for allied health profession in the Division of Allied Health Sciences, College of Nursing and Allied Health Sciences. It familiarizes students with basic computer tutorial and information technology as adapted for use of medical health electronic record management such as laptops, PDAs, IPODs including Blackboard and McGraw-Hill Online computer system and basic computer tutorial in collaboration with the Center for Excellence in Teaching, Learning, &Assessment [CETLA]. The multimedia presentations online and classrooms settings will enhance the management of skills related to state-of-the-art medical and health services data management. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Registration in the Divisions of Nursing and Allied Health Sciences. 

AHCC 203: Child Health Issues 
This d course will utilize a socio-ecological approach to provide students with a solid understanding of biological, psychosocial, environmental, cultural, political and other determinants of child and adolescent health. 
Credits: 
3 

AHCC 301: Ethics for Health Profession 
Provides students with foundational knowledge and skills in responsible professional behavior that will enable them to competently reflect upon, address and resolve the ethical and socio-cultural issues that students will confront during their training and professional practice. 
Credits: 
2 

AHCC 375: Geriatrics for Allied Health Professions 
This course is designed for students in Allied Health Professions. It covers two consecutive modules in geriatrics and long term care theories and practices. It will provide knowledge about aging process, medical care, as well as long term care management of the American Health Care delivery services. The course will emphasize the demographic changes and determinants life-styles. It will increase the students’ knowledge of the health care continuum of aging and long term care. It also emphasizes health promotion strategies, promotes critical thinking, problem solving through the use of case studies, and gives students a solid background in understanding long-term care. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
Registration in the Divisions of Nursing and Allied Health Sciences. 

HHPL 167: MCH-Institute 
Provides students with the basic knowledge to work with public and private health agencies that provide services to women, infant, children, adolescent and families. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 723: Introduction to Research and Statistics 
A comprehensive introduction to the fundamental aspects of research methods and statistics.topics ranging from study design, data type and graphs through to choice and interpretation of statistical tests - with a particular focus on standard errors, confidence intervals and p-values. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 755: Addictive Behavior 
This course revises how individuals can become "addicted". It discusses current research and critiques of the concept of dependency, contemporary psychological theories about addictive behavior, treatment issues, and strategies to change or shift co-dependent patterns. 
Credits: 
3 

Interdisciplinary Studies 
IDSD 140: Introduction to Social Justice Studies 
Credits: 
1 

IDSD 141: What Does Justice Look Like for Black Americans? 
Since the inception of the United States of America, Black Americans have been subject to all manner of social injustice. These facts are well known. In this course, we will think about what justice looks like for Black Americans. In doing so, we will consider general questions about social justice, the nature of racism in America, and tools that may be used to combat the effects of racial discrimination. 
Credits: 
1 

IDSD 154: Social Movement Theory 
This course examines how various forms of collective behavior (e.g., fads, panics, riots, and social movements) emerge. We approach this question using theoretical and analytic tools developed in diverse fields of social science, including sociology (social movements, organizational behavior, social networks). The course will provide an overview of social movements and demonstrate the vital role they play in bringing forth social change and equality, particularly in the U.S. A sociological approach will be used to gain a deeper critical understanding of the development and characteristics of social movements and when, how, and why people engage them. Collective behavior is behavior in which the usual social conventions and norms no longer guide social action and people bypass established institutional patterns to form new norms spontaneously. This course will specifically focus on the collective behaviors, collective actions, within social movements such as the Civil Rights to LGBT movement to Black Lives Matter movements 
Credits: 
1 

Mathematics 
MATH 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
MATH 005 : College Algebra I WR 
An intensive college algebra course that emphasizes manipulative algebra, solutions of equations and inequalities, and graphs and analysis of linear, quadratic, exponential and logarithmic functions. Three lecture hours and two recitation hours per week. Equivalent to Math 006 
Credits: 
4 

MATH 006: College Algebra I 
An intensive college algebra course that emphasizes manipulative algebra, solutions of equations and inequalities, and certain elementary functions. Equivalent to Math 005. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Satisfactory score on mathematics placement examination. 

MATH 007: Precalculus 
Exponential and logarithmic functions; trigonometry, and systems of equations. Students planning to take 156 should take this course. It is not intended for those students planning to take 026; they should take 010 instead. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
006, or satisfactory score on the Mathematics Placement Examination. 

MATH 009: Introduction to Statistics 
A first course in statistics that may be followed by more specialized statistics courses offered by other departments of the University. Not intended for students who have taken calculus; students with a calculus background should take 189. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 006, or satisfactory score on the Mathematics Placement Examination. 

MATH 010: College Algebra II 
Exponential and logarithmic functions; matrix theory, combinatorics, and probability. Students planning to take 026 should take this course. It is not intended for students planning to take 156, who should, instead, follow 006 with 007. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 006, or satisfactory score on the Mathematics Placement Examination. 

MATH 012: Patterns in Mathematics 
Introduction to the art, nature and applications of mathematics. Emphasis is placed on mathematical patterns occurring in real life situations. The course is not intended for students planning to take any Calculus course 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 006, or satisfactory score on the Mathematics Placement Examination. 

MATH 020: Fundamental Concepts of Mathematics for Education I 
Fundamental concepts of mathematics needed by elementary school teachers. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 006, or satisfactory score on the Mathematics Placement Examination. 

MATH 021: Fundamental Concepts of Mathematics for Education II 
Algebra, expressions and solving equations. Visualization. Properties of angles, circles, spheres, triangles, and quadrilaterals. Measurement, length, area, and volume. Transformations, congruence, and similarity. Basic descriptive statistics and probability. Required of all students in an elementary school certification program. Offered every spring semester. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 020 

MATH 026: Applied Calculus 
Limits; differentiation; integration; introduction to differential equations; and functions of several variables. . Prerequisite MATH 007 or 010 or outstanding score on Mathematics Placement Examination. 
Credits: 
4 

MATH 084-085: Directed Readings in Honors for Sophomores 
This set of courses (084, 085, 088, 089, 092, 093) is designed for students in the honor's program, and is designed to help students writing an honor's thesis. Others may take the courses with consent of the instructor. 
Credits: 
1 

MATH 088-089: Directed Readings in Honors for Juniors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
1 

MATH 092-093: Senior Departmental Honors 
Focuses on topics related to participation in the Honors Program. 
Credits: 
3 

MATH 101: Proof and Problem Seminar I 
 This course and 102 are designed to help mathematics majors make the transition from the Calculus sequence to more advanced and abstract courses, and is to be taken early when a student declares a major. The topics are sets, relations, functions, proofs by induction and contradiction, complex numbers, and binomial coefficients. Corequisite: MATH 156. 
Credits: 
1 

MATH 102: Proof and Problem Seminar II 
 A continuation of 101. The topics of 101 are reinforced by going more deeply into one of number theory, dynamics, probability, graph theory, or modeling. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
101. Coreq: 157. 

MATH 150: Modern Geometry 
Deductive reasoning through the study of selected topics from Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometrics. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
157. 

MATH 156: Calculus I 
Limits, continuity, and the derivative and integral of functions of one variable, with applications. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
007 or outstanding score on Mathematics Placement Examination. 

MATH 157: Calculus II 
Continuation of 156, including more integration, sequences, series, Taylor's theorem, improper integrals, and L'Hospital's rule. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
156. 

MATH 158: Calculus III 
Continuation of 157, including calculus of functions of several variables, with applications. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
157. 

MATH 159: Differential Equations 
Elementary techniques of ordinary differential equations, including slope fields, equilibria, separation of variables, linear differential equations, homogeneous differential equations, undetermined coefficients, bifurcations, power series, Laplace transforms, systems, and numerical methods. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
157. 

MATH 160: Advanced Calculus for Science and Engineering 
Vector calculus in several dimensions. Generalizations of the fundamental theorem of calculus. Stokes theorem divergence theorem. Inverse and implicit functions theorems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
158. 

MATH 161, 162: Seminar 
Offered on demand; seminars in various topics in mathematics. 
Credits: 
1 
- 
3 

MATH 164: Introduction to Numerical Analysis 
Treats numerical integration and numerical solution of differential equations; numerical linear algebra, matrix inversion, characteristic values; error propagation; and stability. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
159 and SYCS 135. 

MATH 165, 166: Directed Readings. 
Readings under a faculty member whose approval is required for admission to course. 
Credits: 
1 
- 
3 

MATH 168: Actuarial Science Laboratory I 
 Systematic methods and approaches for rapid and accurate solutions of problems arising in elementary algebra, calculus, and analysis. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor or 158. 

MATH 169: Actuarial Science Laboratory II 
 Continuation of 168 with the problems to be solved coming from mathematical statistics. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor or 190. 

MATH 180: Introduction to Linear Algebra 
Vector Spaces, linear transformations, the Gram-Schmidt process, determinants, eigenvectors and eigenvalues, diagonalization and applications. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 157 

MATH 181: Discrete Structures 
Algebraic structures applicable to computer science; semigroups, graphs, lattices, Boolean algebras, and combinatorics. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
157. 

MATH 183: Intermediate Differential Equations 
Initial value problems, existence and uniqueness of solutions, properties of solutions boundary value problems, Sturm-Liouville systems, and orthogonal expansions. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
159 and 180. 

MATH 184: Introduction to Number Theory 
Elements theory of algebraic number theory. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
197. 

MATH 185: Introduction to Complex Variables 
Complex numbers and their geometry, plane topology, limits, continuity, differentiation, Cauchy-Riemann equations, analytic functions, series, Cauchy theorems, contour integration, and residue theory. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
195. 

MATH 186: Introduction to Differential Geometry 
Calculus in Euclidean space, vector fields, geometry of surfaces, and curves. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
158 and 180. 

MATH 187: Introduction to Algebraic Topology 
Complexes, homology, surface topology, and the classical groups. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
197 and 199. 

MATH 189: Probability and Statistics I 
Samples spaces, random variables, distributions, expectation, independence, law of large numbers. .Prerequisite: 158. 
Credits: 
3 

MATH 190: Probability and Statistics II 
 Continuation of 189. Includes estimation, order statistics, sufficient statistics, test of hypotheses, and analysis of variance. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
189. 

MATH 191: Foundations of Applied Mathematics 
Introduction to the concepts and methods of applied mathematics, including gravitational motion, calculus of variations, Lagrange's and Hamilton's equations; approximation techniques, partial differential equations, Fourier series, and Fourier integrals. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
159. 

MATH 192: Topics in Applied Mathematics 
Topics are selected from the following areas: combinatorics, computer science, control theory, fluid dynamics, game theory, information theory, mathematical biology, and statistical mechanics. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 191 or permission of instructor. 

MATH 193: Actuarial Science Seminar 
Treats life contingency, or the theory of interest, or other applications of mathematics to actuarial science as required. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
190. 

MATH 194: Introduction to Set Theory 
 Axiomatic foundations; relations and functions; ordered and well-ordered sets; ordinals and cardinals and axiom of choice with its equivalents. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
195. 

MATH 195: Introduction to Analysis I 
Set theory, logic, real and complex numbers, introductory topology, and continuous function. Required for mathematics majors. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
157. 

MATH 196: Introduction to Analysis II 
Sequences; series; limits; continuity; uniform continuity and convergence; differentiation and integration of functions of one variable. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
195. 

MATH 197: Introduction to Modern Algebra I 
Groups, rings, fields and homomorphisms. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
180. 

MATH 198: Introduction to Modern Algebra II 
Continuation of 197, including isomorphism theorems, Cayley's theorem, the Sylow theorems, p-groups, abelian groups, unique factorization domains, and Galois theory. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
197. 

MATH 199: Introduction to General Topology 
Topological spaces; relative topology; and subspaces, finite product spaces; quotient spaces; continuous and topological maps; compactness; connectedness; and separation axioms. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
157 and 195. 

MATH 795: Introduction to Analysis. Writing across the curriculum. 
Writing across the curriculum. See 195. This version of the course fulfills an undergraduate writing requirement. 
Credits: 
3 

Music 
http://www.coas.howard.edu/music/ 
 
The music program at Howard University has a rich history which may be traced to 1870, when a few courses were offered. In 1892, the program was organized as a stable department of the Normal School, and in 1914 it was established as an independent conservatory. 
The School of Music (now Department of Music), under the dynamic leadership of Dean Warner Lawson, was admitted to membership in the National Association of Schools of Music in 1942, the first music program in the Washington area to gain such membership. In January 1974, the program was reorganized as a department of the College of Fine Arts. Since the merger of the College of Fine Arts and the College of Arts and Sciences in August 1998, the Department of Music has functioned as one of three areas within the Division of Fine Arts of the College of Arts and Sciences. 
MISSION 
The Howard University Department of Music is a professional fine arts unit within an historically Black private university. Its purpose is to attract diverse students of high artistic and academic potential, and provide for them a scholarly environment and musical experience of exceptional quality in performance, research, pedagogy, technology, therapy, and composition. The Department is dedicated to attracting and retaining faculty of the highest order who work together to inspire students, through example and leadership, to reach their full intellectual and artistic potential. The Department of Music places particular emphasis on the provision of educational and cultural opportunities for individuals of the global community, with significant focus given to the musical contributions of peoples of the African Diaspora. 
 
ADMISSIONS 
All applicants to the Department of Music must apply to the University and satisfy Howard University academic requirements before being admitted to the Department. Prospective students are encouraged to read and comply with the admission process as set forth by the University Office of Admission. 
 
ADMISSION AUDITIONS 
All new applicants to the Department of Music must present a successful audition in order to be admitted to the Department. Former students who have not been enrolled in the Department for two or more consecutive semesters must re-audition. Generally, auditions are held on campus according to a published schedule, but special appointments may be arranged when necessary. When an in-person audition is not feasible, an applicant may request permission to submit a recorded audition. 
In all cases, it is important that an applicant contact the appropriate Performance Area Coordinator to schedule an audition prior to published deadlines. 
Performance Area Coordinators: 
Classical - Instrumental:                          Fred Irby, III                              firby@howard.edu 
Classical - Piano:                    Charles Timbrell     ctimbrell@howard.edu 
Classical - Voice:                     Gregory Hopkins  gregoryhhopkins@aol.com 
Jazz - Instrumental:                                    Charlie Young, III cyoung@howard.edu 
Jazz - Voice:                                                 Connaitre Miller    conmiller@howard.edu 
 
 
Audition Requirements 
Applicants should download and complete an audition form which is available on the Music Department’s website at http://www.coas.howard.edu/music/admissions/admissions.html and bring the form with you to your audition. 
All auditions should include technical exercises, scales and arpeggii, and at least three compositions of different periods and in different styles. Additionally, please note the specific audition requirements in the following areas: 
JAZZ STUDIES 
Applicants wishing to be admitted to freshman classification as majors in Jazz Studies must demonstrate the following: 
• 
Instrumental: A thorough knowledge of the basic technique of the chosen instrument; basic improvisation skills as they relate to standard jazz literature. 

• 
Voice: Three (3) selections in contrasting jazz styles and tempos. (e.g. med. swing, fast swing, blues, ballad, bossa nova, samba, jazz waltz etc...) The addition of improvisation (scat singing) encouraged for at least one tune. Bring sheet music or lead sheets in the key in which you sing. You may bring your own accompanist or one will be provided. A short interview will follow the audition. 


 
PERFORMANCE MAJORS 
Applicants wishing to be admitted to freshman classification as majors in Performance must demonstrate the following: 
• 
Piano: The ability to play any scale or arpeggio in moderately rapid tempo, hands together; standard studies, such as Czerny, Op. 299, Bk. 1; easier classical sonatas; a short romantic work; and a work by Bach (equivalent to an Invention or Prelude and Fugue). 

• 
Violin: The ability to perform studies of the difficulty of Kreutzer Etudes and works of the grade of the Viotti Concerto in G Major 3 and the Mozart Third Concerto in G Major. 

• 
Voice: A good natural voice and the ability to sing simple songs on pitch with correct phrasing and musical intelligence, and sing from memory two (2) selections of contrasting styles. 

• 
Orchestral Instruments, including Saxophone and Guitar: A thorough knowledge of the basic technique of the chosen instrument; students must own their own instruments; previous study of piano is desirable. 


 
STRING STUDIES 
• 
Dates for live auditions will be announced in the Fall. A well-recorded DVD audition containing the requirements listed below is acceptable and recommended for those residing a considerable distance from the DC area. Please do not submit audio-only CDs. 

• 
All auditions must be played on the candidate's own instrument, which must be of an appropriate quality for advanced study. 

• 
Orchestra audition requirements are the same as those for instrumental minor. 


Violin Major (performance) 
• 
. 
Scales in all major and minor keys, 3 octaves, slow and fast tempi. 

. 
A complete etude of Kreutzer, Rode, or comparable difficulty. 

. 
Two contrasting movements from an unaccompanied Bach sonata or partita. 

. 
First movement of a major concerto written after 1750. 





 
 
Violin Minor (education, business, therapy) 
• 
. 
A three octave scale in both slow and fast tempi. 

. 
A complete etude. 

. 
Two short solo works or movements (complete) of contrasting style and tempo. 





 
Viola Major (performance) 
• 
. 
Scales in all major and minor keys, 3 octaves, slow and fast tempi. 

. 
A complete etude of Kreutzer or comparable difficulty. 

. 
Two contrasting movements of an unaccompanied Bach suite. 

. 
First movement of a major concerto or other major solo. 





Viola Minor (education, business or therapy) 
• 
. 
A three octave scale in both slow and fast tempi. 

. 
A complete etude of at least ASTA grade 3 (Hoffmeister, Kayser, Mazas, Wohlfhart) 

. 
Two contrasting solo selections of at least ASTA Grade 3 (Bach Cello Suites, Telemann Concerto, Suzuki Book 4). 





Violoncello Major (performance) 
• 
. 
Scales in all major and minor keys, 3 octaves, slow and fast tempi. 

. 
A complete etude of Popper or Duport, or a Caprice by Piatti. 

. 
Two contrasting movements from an unaccompanied Bach suite. 

. 
First movement of a major concerto (Haydn C or D Major, Saint-Saens, Boccherini, Elgar, Dvorak or similar difficulty). 





Violoncello Minor (education, business, therapy) 
• 
. 
A two octave scale in both slow and fast tempi. 

. 
A complete etude (Dotzauer, Merk, Lee or similar difficulty). 

. 
Two short works or movements of contrasting style and tempo. 





Double Bass Major (performance) 
• 
. 
Scales in all major and minor keys, 2 octaves, slow and fast tempi. 

. 
A complete etude of Simandl, Nanny or comparable difficulty 

. 
Two contrasting movements from a Sonata or Bach Suite 

. 
First movement of a concerto. 





Double Bass Minor (education, business, therapy) 
• 
. 
A two octave scale in both slow and fast tempi. 

. 
A complete etude. 

. 
Two short works or movements of contrasting style and tempo. 





 
FINANCIAL AID 
Students should carefully review and avail themselves of the information presented on the website of the Office of Financial Aid. While the Department of Music does award scholarships and grants to eligible, deserving students, competition is rigorous for limited funds. Students are therefore encouraged to explore all possible avenues of financial support for their college education. 
Department of Music Financial Aid 
(1) Financial aid is awarded only to individuals who have been admitted by both the University Office of Admission and the Department of Music. 
(2) Scholarships and grant awards from Howard University funds are available only to students who complete the FREE APPLICATION FOR FEDERAL STUDENT AID (FAFSA). 
• The FAFSA may be secured from the Howard University Office of Financial Aid, high school guidance counselors, and public libraries. 
• The FAFSA must be submitted before February 1st each year. 
(3) Any financial assistance recommended by the Department of Music may be reduced after analysis of the student's file by the Office of Financial Aid, depending on: 
• Other available funding sources (family income, Federal grants, etc.); and University and Federal regulations. 
(4) The Department of Music is unable to award full scholarships. 
(5) Prospective students are eligible for Department of Music scholarships based on audition performance and recommendations from the faculty. 
(6) Music Scholarships are awarded for one semester or one academic year at a time only. Students must re-apply for scholarships each year. The Department of Music does not guarantee a specific scholarship amount from year-to-year. Additionally, please note the following: 
 
Satisfactory Academic Progress (SAP) 
Continuing music students must successfully complete 70% of courses attempted each semester to be eligible for a Department of Music award the following semester. If the student has been awarded for the school year but then does not satisfy the SAP requirement in the Fall semester, then the Spring portion of the original award may be rescinded. Separately, if the Spring semester does not satisfy the SAP then the student is ineligible for a departmental award the following semester. Such recaptured scholarship funds may be awarded to other eligible students. This policy allows academically successful students to receive additional assistance. 
 
MUSIC MAJORS 
 
The Department of Music offers programs of study leading to the Bachelor of Music degree with concentrations in Composition, Jazz Studies, Music with Elective Studies in Business, Music History, Music Education, and Music Therapy. 
 
Composition 
The Composition program develops skills required of a music composer, including courses in orchestration and theoretical studies. Composition majors are accepted by audition as piano, voice or instrumental minors. Upon completion of the second-year requirements with a 3.0 GPA in all theory courses through MUSB-042, students will be admitted to the upper division in the composition programs. 
 
Jazz Studies 
The Jazz Studies program develops skills in jazz performance, composition, arranging, and history; and offers an optional emphasis in Music Technology. The objective of the Jazz Studies program is to preserve and perpetuate jazz through instruction, performance, and research. Included in the curriculum are improvisation, arranging, composing, history, digital music, and studies relating to the music business. Undergraduate Jazz Studies majors may use one of the following schemes to add a concentration in Music Technology, which includes studies in MIDI sequencing, notation software, audio recording, and live sound reinforcement. Students may be admitted to the technology program only after being accepted into the Jazz Studies Program through audition. 
Music with Elective Studies in Business 
The Music with Electives in Business program is a Music Major program in either Performance or Jazz Studies, while taking additional courses in Business Administration. Currently, the business courses include subjects such as economics, accounting, principles of marketing, and statistics. The program requires an administrative internship in the arts community during the senior year. Auditions are for acceptance into the Performance or Jazz Studies major areas. 
 
 
Music Education 
The Bachelor of Music in Music Education program provides the training to become a certified teacher of either vocal or instrumental music, grades K through 12, in the District of Columbia. This teaching certificate is reciprocal to more than 30 other states in the United States. 
The Instrumental Emphasis prepares students for work as Band Directors while the Vocal Emphasis program prepares students as Choral Directors. 
Student Teaching is required in the final semester, and only after all major work has been completed. The following pre-requisites must be completed prior to student teaching: 
• Students must pass Praxis I examination 
• Students who are not piano minors must pass the Piano Proficiency examination prior to their 7th semester, and in order to achieve Senior classification. 
• An average of "B" must be achieved in all Music Education and Education courses. 
 
Music History 
The Music History program develops overall music scholarship and hones research skills. Students will not be permitted to elect history as a major until they have completed MUSC-005 and MUSC-006 with grades of B or better. Students who major in the history of music must meet the requirements for a minor in piano and must appear creditably on student recitals in this subject. Candidates for graduation will be required to pass an oral examination before a music faculty committee. Students must maintain a B average in their major subject. At least two major projects must relate to an aspect of the black heritage in music. 
Music Therapy 
The Music Therapy program provides the training to pass the Music Therapy Board Certification Examination. Music Therapy majors are accepted by audition as instrumental, piano or voice minors. After successful completion of all HU academic requirements (including the Piano Proficiency examination prior to their 7th semester), students must complete a Music Therapy Clinical Internship at an AMTA approved site. Approval from the program coordinator is required to begin the Internship, after which the student will be qualified to sit for the Music Therapy Board Certification Examination. 
 
 
EDUC 331: Special Education 
An introduction to special education with an overview of suggestions to assist beginning early education teachers prepare to recognize and handle special needs of children and their families. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSB 003: Elem. Ear Tr. I 
Credits: 
2 

MUSB 004: Elem. Ear Tr. II 
Continuation of MUSB 003. Elementary Ear Training and Sight Singing. 2 crs. ea. Development of music reading skills, with emphasis on melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic dictation, and music literature. Coreq: MUSB-00. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSB 011: Adv. Ear Tr. I 
Credits: 
2 

MUSB 012: Adv. Ear Tr. II 
Continuation of MUSB 011.Advanced Ear Training and Sight Singing. 2 crs. ea. Advanced music reading, emphasizing contemporary literature, and melodic-rhythmic- harmonic dictation. Coreq.: MUSB-041, 042. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSB 016: Keyboard Harmony 
Credits: 
2 

MUSB 021: Elem. Harmony I 
Credits: 
3 

MUSB 022: Elem. Harmony II 
Continuation of MUSB 021. Presents basic principles of diatonic harmony through melodic harmonizations, creative writing, and analysis. Coreq.: MUSB-003, 004. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSB 041: Adv. Harmony I 
Credits: 
3 

MUSB 042: Adv. Harmony II 
Continuation of MUSB 041. Study of chromatic harmony and melody through harmonization, creative writing, and analysis, along with an introduction to twentieth-century techniques. Prereqs.: MUSB-021, MUSB-022. Coreq.: MUSB-011, 012. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSB 151: Composition I 
Credits: 
3 

MUSB 152: Composition II 
Continuation of MUSB 151. Consists of writing in small forms for simple instrumental combinations. Prerequisite: MUSB-042. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSB 153: Composition III 
Credits: 
3 

MUSB 154: Composition IV 
Continuation of MUSB 153. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSC 010: Music History I: Antiquity-1680 
Explores concepts, definitions, musical literature, trends, performance practices, and composers from antiquity to 1680. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSC 011: Music History II: 18th & 19th C. 
The Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries. 3 crs. This course focuses on the study of symphony, chamber music, opera, andother forms from 1680 to 1880. It exposes students to core aesthetic concepts and musical repertoire from notated European and North American traditions. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSC 012: Music History III: The 20th C. 
Analyzes styles, composers, and techniques from 1880 to the present. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSC 201: Senior Thesis 
Provides an opportunity for independent research; offers experience in writing a lengthy researched essay on a music topic or creative work 
Credits: 
1 

MUSD 021: Instrumental Pedagogy 
Instruction in the history, function, and advanced teaching techniques of the various instruments. Must also be enrolled in MUxx Instrumental Major private instruction courses as a BM in Performance major. Prerequisite: at least 4 semesters of major level private instruction. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSD 120: Contemporary Trends in Music Ed. I 
Credits: 
1 

MUSD 121: Contemporary Trends in Music Ed. II 
Includes scales, arpeggios (four octaves), Bach short works, sonatinas, and selected Romantic and Modern works. Prereqs.: MUSE-111, 112, or consent of instructor. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSE 051: Piano Proficiency Exam 
Required of all UG music majors when piano is not the main performance area. Examination must be passed before Senior status is awarded. MUSE 011- 022 Functional Piano I-IV are recommended before taking the exam. 
Credits: 
0 

MUSE 110: Functional Piano I Therapy 
Students will develop functional skills and repertoire for leading and accompanying vocal and instrumental activities in the music therapy setting. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSE 111: Piano Minor I 
Credits: 
2 

MUSE 112: Piano Minor II 
Continuation of MUSE 111. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSE 120: Functional Piano II Therapy 
Continuation of MUSE 110. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSE 121: Piano Minor III 
Credits: 
2 

MUSE 122: Piano Minor IV 
Continuation of MUSE 121. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSE 130: Functional Piano III Therapy 
Continuation of MUSE 120. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSE 131: Piano Minor V 
Credits: 
2 

MUSE 132: Piano Minor VI 
Continuation of MUSE 131. Continuation of technical work with Czerny Opus 299; Bach Two-and Three-Part Inventions, Haydn sonatas, selected Romantic works. Prereqs.: MUSE-121, 122, or consent of instructor. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSE 140: Functional Piano IV Therapy 
Continuation of MUSE 130. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSE 141: Piano Minor VII 
Credits: 
2 

MUSE 142: Piano Minor VIII 
Continuation of MUSE 141. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSE 153: Vocal Accompanying I 
Credits: 
2 

MUSE 154: Vocal Accompanying 
Continuation of MUSE 153. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSE 157: Piano Pedagogy 
Credits: 
2 

MUSE 158: Piano Pedagogy II 
Continuaiton of MUSE 157. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSE 211: Piano Major I 
Credits: 
3 

MUSE 212: Piano Major II 
Continuation of MUSE 211. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSE 221: Piano Major III 
Credits: 
3 

MUSE 222: Piano Major IV 
Continuation of MUSE 221. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSE 231: Piano Major V 
Credits: 
3 

MUSE 232: Piano Major VI 
Continuation of MUSE 231. Continuation of technical and repertory work, with a technical examination. Prereqs.: MUSE-221, 222, or consent of instructor. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSE 241: Piano Major VII 
Credits: 
3 

MUSE 242: Piano Major VIII 
Continuation of MUSE 241. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSF 111: Organ Minor I 
Credits: 
2 

MUSF 112: Organ Minor II 
Credits: 
2 

MUSF 121: Organ Minor III 
Credits: 
2 

MUSF 122: Organ Minor IV 
Continuation of MUSF 121. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSF 131: Organ Minor V 
Credits: 
2 

MUSF 132: Organ Minor VI 
Continuation of MUSF 131. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSF 141: Organ Minor VII 
Credits: 
2 

MUSG 003: Voice Instruction 
One on one private voice lessons for students pursuing the music minor in classical voice. A healthy technique is taught using standard art song, folk song and spiritual repertoire. Students are required to perform a final exam/jury at the end of each semester. May berepeated. Prerequisites: Audition. Restricted: Music minors only 
Credits: 
1 

MUSG 031: Voice for Instrument Majors 
A group voice class for music education majors intended to teach a healthy singing technique for the student and offer instruction on age-appropriate materials for K-12 singers. Repertoire studied includes standard art song, folk song, spiritual, and music theaterrepertoire. Restricted: Music Education Majors only 
Credits: 
1 

MUSG 111: Voice Minor I 
Credits: 
2 

MUSG 112: Voice Minor II 
A continuation of private voice instruction for the classical voice music major. Students continue their study of healthy technique through standard art song, spiritual, oratorio and operatic literature. Music Therapy students study contemporary commercial music. Restricted: Music majors only 
Credits: 
2 

MUSG 121: Voice Minor III 
Credits: 
2 

MUSG 122: Voice Minor IV 
A continuation of private voice instruction for the classical voice music major. Students continue their study of healthy technique through standard art song, spiritual, oratorio and operatic literature. Music Therapy students study contemporary commercial music. Restricted: Music majors only 
Credits: 
2 

MUSG 131: Voice Minor V 
Credits: 
2 

MUSG 132: Voice Minor VI 
A continuation of private voice instruction for the classical voice music major. Students continue their study of healthy technique through standard art song, spiritual, oratorio and operatic literature. Music Therapy students study contemporary commercial music. Restricted: Music majors only. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSG 141: Voice Minor VII 
Credits: 
2 

MUSG 142: Voice Minor VIII 
This is the Senior Recital semester. Students prepare a 30-minute recital featuring repertoire of the Baroque, Classic, Romantic, 20th and 21st centuries, including art songs or operatic arias by African American Composers. Student register for MUTO 112. A jury may be required. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSG 156: Diction for Singers I 
Students learn to use the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) utilizing it to learn correct pronunciation and articulation for singing literature in English, Latin and Italian. Fall semester only. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSG 211: Voice Major I 
Credits: 
3 

MUSG 212: Voice Major II 
One-on-one private voice lessons for the classical voice Performance music major. A healthy technique is taught using standard art song, spiritual and oratorio literature. German and French literature may be added. Operatic arias may be added. 3 - 5 selections are learned and presented at the final exam/jury. Students must perform on Student Recital. Restricted to BM Performance Voice majors 
Credits: 
3 

MUSG 221: Voice Major III 
Credits: 
3 

MUSG 222: Voice Major IV 
Continuation of one-on-one private lessons for the classical voice Performance music major. All major languages are studied. 4 - 6 selections are learned and presented at the final exam/jury. Students must perform on Student Recital. Restricted to BM Performance Voice majors. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSG 231: Voice Major V 
Credits: 
3 

MUSG 232: Voice Major VI 
This is the Junior Recital/Qualifying Recital semester. Students prepare a 30-minute recital featuring repertoire of the Baroque, Classic, Romantic, 20th and 21st centuries, including art songs or operatic arias by African American Composers. Student register for MUTO 111. A jury may be required. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSG 241: Voice Major VII 
Credits: 
3 

MUSG 242: Voice Major VIII 
This is the Senior Recital/Qualifying Recital Semester. Students prepare a 60-minute recital featuring repertoire of the Baroque, Classical, Romantic, 20th and 21st centuries, including art songs and arias by African American Composers. Students register for MUTO 112. A jury may be required. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSH 011: Improvisation I 
Credits: 
2 

MUSH 016: Jazz Keyboard Harmony 
Development of chord reading and jazz harmonic voicing skills at the piano. Fall/Spring. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSH 021: Improvisation III 
Credits: 
2 

MUSH 031: Improvisation V 
Credits: 
2 

MUSH 041: Improvisation VII 
Credits: 
2 

MUSH 042: Improvisation VIII 
Continuation of MUSH-031,032. Prereqs.: MUSH-031, 032, or consent of instructor 
Credits: 
2 

MUSI 001: Seminar in Music Business 
Reports and discussions of topics relevant to careers in arts management. Fall/ Spring 
Credits: 
1 

MUSI 031: Introduction to Entertainment Law 
Credits: 
3 

MUSI 033: Entrepreneurship in the Arts 
Course exploring opportunities in the music, media, and communications industries. Spring. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSI 110: Jazz History 
Credits: 
3 

MUSJ 116: Practicum III 
A continuation of MUSJ 103. A course in which the primary goal is to enhance the student’s previously acquired knowledge and abilities by applying them within a professional setting.  The practicum  is completed under the direction of the faculty in conjunction with a site supervisor.  
Credits: 
0 

MUSJ 122: Independent Study 
Course allowing for directed research in music therapy. Requires consent of the instructor. Fall/ Spring. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSO 110: Guitar Class Therapy 
This course is designed to provide a foundation for the development of clinical guitar skills for the music therapy student with little or no guitar playing experience. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSO 111: Guitar Minor I 
Credits: 
2 

MUSO 112: Guitar Minor II 
Open position major and minor scales, arpeggi, and chords; slurs and left hand development exercises; etudes and solos in various styles. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSO 121: Guitar Minor III 
Credits: 
2 

MUSO 122: Guitar Minor IV 
Continuation of MUSO-111, 112 with moveable altered scales, arpeggi, and chord forms. Prereqs.: MUSO-111, 112 or consent of instructor. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSO 131: Guitar Minor V 
Credits: 
2 

MUSO 132: Guitar Minor VI 
Continuation of MUSO-121, 122. Prereqs.: MUSO-121, 122, or consent of instructor. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSZ 111: Piano Trio (Ens.) I 
Credits: 
1 

MUSZ 112: Piano Trio Minor II 
Focuses on advanced harmonic and rhythmic studies for the pianist and the rhythm section. Various styles included. Rhythmic comping and the use of rhythmic motif displacement as a comping and soloing technique in various styles.   ea. Continuation of MUSZ 111 
Credits: 
1 

MUSZ 121: Piano Trio (Ens.) III 
Credits: 
1 

MUSZ 122: Piano Trio Minor IV 
Focuses on advanced harmonic and rhythmic studies for the pianist and the rhythm section. Various styles included. Rhythmic comping and the use of rhythmic motif displacement as a comping and soloing technique in various styles.   ea. Continuation of MUSZ 121 
Credits: 
1 

MUTF 111: Guitar Ensemble I 
Credits: 
1 

MUTG 011: Marching Band 
Performance of music for athletic contests and half-time shows at football games, various parades, pep rallies, etc. Membership open to all Howard University students. 
Credits: 
1 

MUTI 011: Jazz Ensemble A I 
Credits: 
1 

MUTI 012: Jazz Ensemble A II 
Deals with Big Band Jazz; composing, arranging, performing, and recordings. Auditions required. 
Credits: 
1 

MUTI 021: Jazz Ensemble A III 
Credits: 
1 

MUTI 023: Jazz Ensemble A IV 
Continuation MUTI 21 
Credits: 
1 

MUTI 031: Jazz Ensemble A V 
Credits: 
1 

MUTI 033: Jazz Ensemble A VI 
Credits: 
1 

MUTI 041: Jazz Ensemble A VII 
Credits: 
1 

MUTI 043: Jazz Ensemble A VIII 
Credits: 
1 

MUTI 112: Jazztet II 
Continuation of MUTI 111 
Credits: 
1 

MUTL 011: University Choir I 
Credits: 
1 

MUTL 012: University Choir II 
Continuation of MUTL 011. Performing vocal ensemble open to all Howard University students. Auditions and appropriate concert and service attire required. 
Credits: 
1 

MUTL 021: University Choir III 
Credits: 
1 

MUTL 022: University Choir IV 
Continuation of MUTL 021,022. Performing vocal ensemble open to all Howard University students,  Auditions and appropriate concert and service attire required. 
Credits: 
1 

MUTL 031: University Choir V 
Credits: 
1 

MUTL 041: University Choir VII 
Credits: 
1 

MUTL 042: University Choir VIII 
Continuation of MUTL 041 
Credits: 
1 

MUTP 209: Music Internship 
One semester internship with an arts-related organization. Internship must be approved by the Area Coordinator. Fall/Spring 
Credits: 
4 

MUTV 111: Jazz Vocal Workshop I 
ndividuals will explore their vocal instrument in a jazz context. Participants will work on fundamentals including: improving breath control and support, jazz phrasing and projection. 
Credits: 
1 

MUTV 112: Jazz Vocal Workshop II 
Continuation of MUTV 111 
Credits: 
1 

MUTV 121: Jazz Vocal Workshop III 
Continuation of MUTV 112 
Credits: 
1 

MUTV 122: Jazz Vocal Workshop IV 
Continuation of MUTV 121 
Credits: 
1 

MUTV 131: Jazz Vocal Workshop V 
Continuation of MUTV 122 
Credits: 
1 

MUTV 132: Jazz Vocal Workshop VI 
Continuation of MUTV 131 
Credits: 
1 

MUTV 141: Jazz Vocal Workshop VII 
Continuation of MUTV 132 
Credits: 
1 

MUTV 142: Jazz Vocal Workshop VIII 
Continuation of MUTV 141 
Credits: 
1 

MUTW 111: Voice for Jazz Studies I 
Techniques of breathing, tone development, and vocal styles as they relate to the jazz idiom; development of the standard jazz repertoire. Audition required. Music Majors only. 
Credits: 
2 

MUTW 112: Voice for Jazz Studies II 
Continuation of MUTW 111 
Credits: 
2 

MUTW 121: Voice for Jazz Studies III 
Continuation of MUTW 112 
Credits: 
2 

MUTW 122: Voice for Jazz Studies IV 
Continuation of MUTW 121 
Credits: 
2 

MUTW 131: Voice for Jazz Studies V 
Continuation of MUTW 122 
Credits: 
2 

MUTW 132: Voice for Jazz Studies VI 
Continuation of MUTW 131 
Credits: 
2 

MUTW 141: Voice for Jazz Studies VII 
Continuation of MUTW 132 
Credits: 
2 

MUTW 142: Voice for Jazz Studies VIII 
Continuation of MUTW 141 
Credits: 
2 

MUTX 121: Jazz Piano III 
Continuation of MUTX 112. 
Credits: 
2 

MUTX 122: Jazz Piano IV 
Continuation of MUTX 121. 
Credits: 
2 

MUTX 132: Jazz Piano VI 
Continuation of MUTX 131. 
Credits: 
2 

MUTX 141: Jazz Piano VII 
Continuation of MUTX 132. 
Credits: 
2 

MUTX 142: Jazz Piano VIII 
Continuation of MUTX 141. 
Credits: 
2 

Accompanying for Ensemble 
MUSY 
MUSY 111, 112: Accompanying for Ensemble 
ea. Provides experience in preparation and public performance as an accompanist for varied ensembles. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSY 121, 122: Accompanying for Ensemble 
ea. Continuation of 448-111, 112. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSY 131, 132: Accompanying for Ensemble 
ea. Continuation of MUSY -121, 122 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUSY -121, 122, or consent of instructor. 

MUSY 141, 142: Accompanying for Ensemble 
ea. Continuation of MUSY 131, 132 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUSY 131, 132, or consent of instructor. 

Bassoon 
MUTT 
MUTT 100: Bassoon Instruction 
 Private lessons to non-music major. Permission of coordinator/instructor required. Course can be repeated. 
Credits: 
1 

MUTT 111, 112: Bassoon Minor 
Consists of major and minor scales and arpeggios, tone production, and etudes and solos in all styles. 
Credits: 
2 

MUTT 121, 122: Bassoon Minor 
Continuation of MUTT 111, 112 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUTT 111, 112, or consent of instructor. 

MUTT 131, 132: Bassoon Minor 
Continuation of MUTT 121, 122 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUTT 121, 122, or consent of instructor. 

MUTT 141, 142: Bassoon Minor 
Continuation of MUTT 131, 132, with preparation for senior recital 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUTT 131, 132, or consent of instructor. 

MUTT 211, 212: Bassoon Major 
Instruction in major and minor scales and arpeggi, along with etudes and solos in all styles. 
Credits: 
4 

MUTT 221, 222: Bassoon Major 
Continuation of MUTT 211, 212, with preparation for qualifying recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUTT 211, 212, or consent of instructor. 

MUTT 231, 232: Bassoon Major 
Continuation of MUTT 221, 222 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUTT 221, 222, or consent of instructor. 

MUTT 241, 242: Bassoon Major 
Continuation of MUTT 231, 232, with preparation for senior recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUTT 231, 232, or consent of instructor. 

Brass Ensemble 
MUTE 
MUTE 111, 112: Brass Ensemble 
ea. Ensemble that performs contemporary and standard brass music, with emphasis given to sight reading, interpretation, and musicianship. 
Credits: 
1 

MUTE 121, 122: Brass Ensemble 
ea. Continuation of MUTE 111, 112 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTE 111, 112, or consent of instructor. 

MUTE 131, 132: Brass Ensemble 
ea. Continuation of MUTE 121, 122 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTE 121, 122, or consent of instructor. 

MUTE 141, 142: Brass Ensemble 
ea. Continuation of MUTE 131, 132 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTE 131, 132, or consent of instructor. 

Clarinet 
MUTS 
MUTS 041: Clarinet Minor VII 
Consists of major and minor scales and arpeggios, tone production, and etudes and solos in all styles. 
Credits: 
2 

MUTS 231, 232: Clarinet Major 
Continuation of MUTS 221, 222 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUTS 221, 222 or consent of instructor. 

MUTS 241, 242: Clarinet Major 
Continuation of MUTS 231, 232, with preparation for senior recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUTS 231, 232. 

Fine Arts Guitar 
MUTP 
MUTP 012: Fine Arts Guitar Lab 
ea. Group instruction for non-music majors in music fundamentals, basic playing and teaching techniques, and repertoire of popular and classical music. 
Credits: 
1 

MUTP 100: Blacks in the Arts 
Provides students with general knowledge and understanding of the contributions of African-American artists and the interrelationship of their achievements with the world of art and culture. Students will profit from the integrated discussion and demonstration of three types of artistic expression: music, theatre, and visual art. 
Credits: 
3 

Flute 
MUSP 
MUSP 100: Flute Instruction 
 Private lessons to non-music major. Permission of coordinator/instructor required. Course can be repeated. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSP 111, 112: Flute Minor 
Includes all minor and major scales and arpeggios, along with suitable studies and solos. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSP 121, 122: Flute Minor 
Continuation MUSP 111, 112 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSP 111, 112 or consent of instructor. 

MUSP 131, 132: Flute Minor 
Continuation of MUSP 121, 122, with more advanced studies and solos 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSP 121, 122 or consent of instructor. 

MUSP 141, 142: Flute Minor 
Continuation of MUSP 131, 132, with preparation for graduating recital 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSP 131, 132 or consent of instructor. 

MUSP 211, 212: Flute Major 
Instruction in major and minor scales and arpeggios, along with etudes and solos in all styles. 
Credits: 
4 

MUSP 221, 222: Flute Major 
Continuation of MUSP 211, 212. Preparation for qualifying recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSP 211, 212 or consent of instructor. 

MUSP 231, 232: Flute Major 
Continuation of MUSP 221, 222 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSP 221, 222 or consent of instructor. 

MUSP 241, 242: Flute Major 
Continuation of MUSP 231, 232 with preparation for senior recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSP 231, 232, or consent of instructor. 

French Horn 
MUST 
MUST 100: French Horn Instruction 
 Private lessons to non-music major. Permission of coordinator/instructor required. Course can be repeated. 
Credits: 
1 

MUST 111, 112: French Horn Minor 
Includes major and minor scales and arpeggi, tone production, and etudes and solos in all styles. 
Credits: 
2 

MUST 121, 122: French Horn Minor 
Continuation of MUST 111, 112 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUST 111, 112, or consent of instructor. 

MUST 131, 132: French Horn Minor 
Continuation of MUST 121, 122 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSS, 121, 122, or consent of instructor. 

MUST 141, 142: French Horn Minor 
Continuation of MUST 131, 132, with preparation for senior recital 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUST 131, 132, or consent of instructor. 

MUST 211, 212: French Horn Major 
Includes major and minor scales and arpeggi, along with etudes and solos in all styles. 
Credits: 
4 

MUST 221, 222: French Horn Major 
Continuation of MUST 211, 212, with preparation for qualifying recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUST 211, 212, or consent of instructor. 

MUST 231, 232: French Horn Major 
Continuation of MUST 221, 222 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUST, 221, 222, or consent of instructor. 

MUST 241, 242: French Horn Major 
Continuation of MUST 231, 232, with preparation for senior recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUST 231, 232, or consent of instructor. 

Fundamentals 
MUSB 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
MUSB 001: Fundamentals of Music 
 Study of notation, simple rhythms, intervals, scales, and dictation of melodies. 
Credits: 
0 

MUSB 002: Introduction to Theory (non-music majors) 
Study of scales, notation, simple rhythms, intervals. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSB 003 (I), 004 (II): Elementary Ear Training and Sight Singing I & II 
Development of music reading skills, with emphasis on melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic dictation, and music literature. Coreq: MUSB 021, 022. 
Credits: 
4 

MUSB 011 (I), 012 (II): Advanced Ear Training and Sight Singing I & II 
Advanced music reading, emphasizing contemporary literature, and melodic-rhythmic-harmonic dictation. Coreq.: MUSB 041, 042. 
Credits: 
4 

MUSB 016/116: Keyboard Harmony & Advanced Keyboard Harmony 
Harmonization, transposition, and improvisation at the keyboard; 116: advanced harmonization, and keyboard improvisation and score reading. 
Credits: 
4 

MUSB 021 (I), 022 (II): Elementary Harmony I & II 
Presents basic principles of diatonic harmony through melodic harmonizations, creative writing, and analysis. Coreq.: MUSB 003, 004. 
Credits: 
6 

MUSB 025: Survey of Harmony (Non-Majors) 
Spring. A compressed course covering diatonic and chromatic tonal harmony, 20th centry harmonic languages, and popular music harmonic styles. Emphasis placed on developing analytical skills, especially or Musical Theatre majors. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSB 021. 

MUSB 041 (I), 042 (II): Advanced Harmony I & II 
Study of chromatic harmony and melody through harmonization, creative writing, and analysis, along with an introduction to twentieth-century techniques 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
MUSB 021, MUSB 022. Coreq.: MUSB 011, 012. 

MUSB 043: Counterpoint 
Introduction to the study of voice leading via the species approach. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSB 042. 

MUSB 085: Sophomore Junior Honors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSB 089: Direct Reading Honors Jr. 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSB 093: Senior Honors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSB 103: Orchestration 
Instrumentation and scoring for large and small ensembles 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSB 042, MUSD 013, MUSD 015, MUSM 017, and MUSM 019. 

MUSB 104: Advanced Orchestration 
Instrumentation and scoring for band and smaller ensembles, including jazz and pop idioms 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSB 103. 

MUSB 124: Form and Analysis 
Composite course in linear, harmonic, and formal analysis. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSB 042. 

MUSB 125: Analysis 
Continuation of MUSB 124 for Composition majors. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSB 124 or consent of instructor. 

MUSB 151, 152: Composition 
Consists of writing in small forms for simple instrumental combinations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSB 042. 

MUSB 153, 154: Composition 
Continuation and intensification of MUSB 152 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSB 151, 152. 

MUSB 207: Individual Research 
Directed by a member of the faculty. Students may receive credit for this course twice. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of faculty member. 

Guitar 
MUSO 
MUSO 100: Guitar Instruction 
 Private lessons to non-music major. Permission of instructor required. Course can be repeated. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSO 105: Non-Major Guitar Class 
ea. Group instruction for non-music majors in music fundamentals, basic playing techniques, and repertoire of popular and classical music. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Student must supply own guitar. 

MUSO 111, 112: Guitar Minor 
Open position major and minor scales, arpeggi, and chords; slurs and left hand development exercises; etudes and solos in various styles. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSO 121, 122: Guitar Minor 
Continuation of MUSO 111, 112 with moveable altered scales, arpeggi, and chord forms 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSO 111, 112 or consent of instructor. 

MUSO 131, 132: Guitar Minor 
Continuation of MUSO 121, 122 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSO 121, 122, or consent of instructor. 

MUSO 141, 142: Guitar Minor 
Continuation of MUSO 131, 132 with preparation for graduating recital 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSO 131, 132 or permission of instructor. 

MUSO 211, 212: Guitar Major 
Scales, arpeggios, and chord forms; slurs and left hand development exercises; etudes and solos in various styles. 
Credits: 
4 

MUSO 221, 222: Guitar Major 
Continuation of MUSO 211, 212 with addition of ensemble works utilizing accompaniment techniques and preparation for qualifying recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSO 211, 212 or consent of instructor. 

MUSO 231, 232: Guitar Major 
Continuation of MUSO 221, 222 with addition of mixed ensemble works in which guitar is featured 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSO 221, 222 or consent of instructor. 

MUSO 241, 242: Guitar Major 
Continuation of MUSO 231, 232 with addition of a guitar concerto and preparation for the senior recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSO 231, 232 or consent of instructor. 

Guitar Ensemble 
MUTF 
MUTF 111, 112: Guitar Ensemble 
ea. Composing, arranging, sight-reading, and performing guitar ensemble music. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
consent of instructor. 

MUTF 121, 122: Guitar Ensemble 
ea. Continuation of MUTF 111, 112. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTF 111, 112 or consent of instructor. 

MUTF 131, 132: Guitar Ensemble 
ea. Continuation of MUTF 121, 122 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTF 121, 122 or consent of instructor. 

MUTF 141, 142: Guitar Ensemble 
ea. Continuation of MUTF 131, 132 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTF- 131, 132 or consent of instructor. 

Harp 
MUTR 
MUTR 100: Harp Instruction. Private lessons for non-music majors 
 Permission of coordinator/instructor. 
Credits: 
1 

MUTR 111, 112: Harp Minor 
Consists of major and minor scales and arpeggios, tonal production, and etudes and solos in all styles. 
Credits: 
2 

MUTR 121, 122: Harp Minor 
Continuation of MUTR 111, 112 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUTR 111, 121, or consent of instructor. 

MUTR 131, 135: Harp Minor 
Continuation of MUTR 121, 122 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUTR 121, 122, or consent of instructor. 

MUTR 141, 142: Harp Minor 
Continuation of MUTR 131, 132. Preparation for senior recital 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUTR 131, 132, or consent of instructor. 

Instrument Repair 
MUSK 
MUSK 011, 012: Instrument Repair 
ea. Teaches basic skills of instrument repair. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSK 021, 022: Instrument Repair 
ea. Continuation of MUSK 011, 012 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUSK 011, 012, or consent of instructor. 

MUSK 031, 032: Instrument Repair 
ea. Continuation of MUSK 021, 022 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUSK 021, 022, or consent of instructor. 

MUSK 041, 042: Instrument Repair 
ea. Continuation of MUSK 031, 032 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUSK 031, 032, or consent of instructor. 

MUSK 111, 112: Piano Technology: Lecture and Practicum 
ea. Analysis of the acoustical construction of the piano and mechanical functions, with concentration on maintenance and repair. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Junior classification. 

MUSK 121, 122: Piano Technology: Lecture and Practicum 
ea. Continuation of MUSK 111, 112. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUSK 112. 

Instrumental 
MUSD 
MUSD 005: Instrumental Survey 
Knowledge, care, history and function of band and orchestral instruments. Spring semester only. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSD 006: Music Education Guitar Class 
 Group instruction in basic technique along with an introduction to repertory. Required of all Music Education majors. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSD 007: Marching Band Technique 
Provides guidelines for administration and supervision; explores a variety of rehearsal and performance techniques for marching band in an educational setting. Spring semester only. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSD 013: Woodwind Instruments I 
 Class instruction in the basic playing and teaching techniques of flute and clarinet. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSD 014: Woodwind Instruments II 
 Class instruction in the basic playing and teaching of oboe and bassoon techniques. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUSD 013 or consent of instructor. 

MUSD 015: String Instruments I 
 Class instruction in the basic playing, teaching techniques of the violin and viola. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSD 016: String Instruments II 
 Class instruction in the basic playing, teaching techniques of the violoncello and string bass. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUSD 015 or consent of instructor. 

MUSD 017: Brass Instruments I 
Class instruction in the history, function, and basic playing techniques of the instruments in the brass family. Spring semester only. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSD 019: Percussion Instruments 
 Class instruction in the history, function, and basic playing, teaching techniques of the various percussion instruments. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSD 051: Elementary Choral Conducting 
Fundamental techniques of choral conducting, basic principles of interpretation and style, and rehearsal techniques. Fall semester only. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSD 052: Advanced Choral Conducting 
Advanced techniques of choral conducting, style and interpretation, and survey of choral literature and major composers. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSD 051 or consent of instructor. Spring semester only. 

MUSD 053: Music in the Elementary School 
Application of child development principles to music teaching on the elementary level. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor. Fall semester only. 

MUSD 054: Music in the Secondary Schools 
Application of adolescent and educational psychology principles to teaching music on the secondary level 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Education 145-005, 145-029; Theory MUSB 116, MUSB 016, MUSB 042; Music Literature MUSC 008; and Music Education MUSD 053 for all except Instrumental Minors. Spring semester only. 

MUSD 057: Teaching and Supervision of Instrumental Music 
Organization and administration of instrumental music in the schools in addition to laboratory experience with university bands 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSD 013, 015, 016, 017, 018, 019, 054. 

MUSD 058: Instrumental Conducting 
Chamber, orchestral, and band music, rehearsal techniques, special problems, and literature for secondary schools 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Instrumental Minor and MUSD 051. 

MUSD 120, 121: Contemporary Trends in Music Educatio 
 Modular courses in current approaches to music, teaching and learning. Required of all Music Education majors. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSD 145-135: Student Teaching 
Observation, seminars, and supervised teaching in accredited elementary and secondary schools 
Credits: 
9 
Prerequisites: 
Senior standing, completion of requirements with a cumulative 2.70 average in Music Education and Education and approved application form. 

MUSD 150: Independent Study in Music Education 
Individual projects approved by Music Education faculty and an assigned instructor. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSD 258: Foundations of Music Education 
Orientation for students considering music teaching as a career. Course will survey the history of music education and inclusion in the public schools while including the philosophic, political, and social foundations of teaching music in the public schools. 
Credits: 
3 

Literature 
MUSC 
MUSC 005: Music Literature to 1600 
Examines concepts, definitions, musical literature, trends, performance practices, and composers from antiquity to 1600. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSC 006: Music Literature of the Baroque and Classical Periods 
Study of symphony, chamber music, opera, and other forms from 1600 to 1830. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSC 005. 

MUSC 007: Music Literature of the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries 
Analyzes styles, composers, and techniques from 1830 to the present. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSC 006. 

MUSC 008: African and Afro-American Music Literature 
Explores traditional African music and American music influenced by the African idiom. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSC 007. 

MUSC 009: Intro. to Ethnomusicology 
This course aims to introduce students to the history, theories and practices of the discipline and current literature that have shaped the field of ethnomusicology. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSC 100: Introduction to Music 
Introduces students to the styles and aesthetics of western music, as well as to foster an enthusiasm for listening to music. Since music can be enjoyed emotionally and intellectually, this course will enable each student to develop an aesthetic awareness of various musical genres from periods ranging from the medieval to contemporary. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSC 101: Music Literature of the Eighteenth Century 
Examines changes from baroque to classical ideals, including the works of Bach, Handel, Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSC 008. 

MUSC 102: Music Literature of the Nineteenth Century 
Study of romanticism, beginning with the mature Beethoven. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSC 008. 

MUSC 103: The Symphony 
Presents the origins and development of the symphony and related forms, including an intensive study of scores. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSC 007. 

MUSC 104: Chamber Music 
Deals with string quartet literature and its antecedents, along with other chamber music forms from Haydn to Bartok. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSC 008. 

MUSC 105: Choral Music 
Treats the emergence and growth of choral music and such related forms as the chanson and madrigal, with emphasis on the Afro-American contribution. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSC 008. 

MUSC 106: Dramatic Music 
Covers such dramatic forms in music as the cantata, passion, oratorio, opera, and musical theater. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSC 008. 

MUSC 110: Global Popular Music 
This course is designed to introduce students to a wide range of popular music from around the world and to explore basic research practices of ethnomusicology and popular music scholarship. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSC 125: Introduction to African Music 
Presents African life and culture with music as a focal point. No previous music training required. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSC 155: Style Criteria 
Examines styles, composition techniques, and performance standards of Western music from the seventeenth to the twentieth centuries. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSC 008. 

MUSC 156: Music Literature of the Twentieth Century 
Treats techniques and trends from 1900 to the present, with special lectures and demonstrations by Composition faculty members. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSC 008. 

MUSC 161, 162: Senior Seminar 
Research projects assigned to seniors. Each student must complete one research project on an Afro-American subject. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSC 204: Chamber Music 
Deals with string quartet literature and its antecedents, along with other chamber music forms from Haydn to Bartok. (Graduate). 
Credits: 
3 

MUSC 207: Individual Research 
Directed by a member of the faculty. Students may receive credit for this course twice. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of faculty member. 

MUSC 221, 222: Vocal Literature 
Study of music for solo voice from its beginnings to present, with consideration of literature for the voice teacher. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSC 008. 

Marching Band 
MUTH 
MUTH 011, 012: Marching Band 
ea. Performance of music for athletic contests and half-time shows at football games, various parades, pep rallies, etc. Membership open to all Howard University students. 
Credits: 
1 
- 
0 

MUTH 021, 022: Marching Band 
ea. Continuation of MUTH 011, 012 
Credits: 
1 
- 
0 
Prerequisites: 
MUTH 011, 012, or consent of instructor. 

MUTH 031, 032: Marching Band 
ea. Continuation of MUTH 021, 022 
Credits: 
1 
- 
0 
Prerequisites: 
MUTH 021, 022, or consent of instructor. 

MUTH 041, 042: Marching Band 
ea. Continuation of MUTH 031, 032 
Credits: 
1 
- 
0 
Prerequisites: 
MUTH 031, 032, or consent of instructor. 

MUTH 111, 112: Concert Band I,II 
The Concert Band is a course where students with previous musical experience can continue basic fundamentals of music performance methods through performance of a band instrument. 
Credits: 
1 

MUTH 121, 122: Concert Band III,IV 
ea. Continuation of MUTH 111, 112 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTH 111, 112, or consent of instructor. 

MUTH 131, 132: Concert Band V,VI 
ea. Continuation of MUTH 121, 122 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTH 121, 122, or consent of instructor. 

MUTH 141, 142: Concert Band VII,VIII 
ea. Continuation of MUTH 131, 132 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTH 131, 132, or consent of instructor. 

Oboe 
MUTU 
MUTU 100: Oboe Instruction 
 Private lessons to non-music major. Permission of coordinator/instructor required. Course can be repeated. 
Credits: 
1 

MUTU 101: Oboe Instruction II 
Continuation of MUTU 100. 
Credits: 
1 

MUTU 111, 112: Oboe Minor 
Consists of major and minor scales and arpeggios, tone production, and etudes and solos in all styles. 
Credits: 
2 

MUTU 121, 122: Oboe Minor 
Continuation of MUTU 111, 112 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUTU 111, 112 or consent of instructor. 

MUTU 131, 132: Oboe Minor 
Continuation of MUTU 121, 122 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUTU 121, 122 or consent of instructor. 

MUTU 141, 142: Oboe Minor 
Continuation of MUTU 131, 132, with preparation for senior recital 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUTU 131, 132 or consent of instructor. 

MUTU 211, 212: Oboe Major 
Includes major and minor scales and arpeggios, along with etudes and solos in all styles. 
Credits: 
4 

MUTU 221, 222: Oboe Major 
Continuation of MUTU 211, 212, with preparation for qualifying recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUTU 211, 212 or consent of instructor. 

MUTU 231, 232: Oboe Major 
Continuation of MUTU 221, 222 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUTU 221, 222 or consent of instructor. 

Orchestra 
MUTJ 
MUTJ 021, 022: Orchestra 
ea. Continuation of MUTJ 011, 012 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTJ 011, 012, or consent of instructor. 

MUTJ 031, 032: Orchestra 
ea. Continuation of MUTJ 021, 022 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTJ 021, 022, or consent of instructor. 

MUTJ 041, 042: Orchestra 
ea. Continuation of MUTJ 031, 032 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTJ 031, 032, or consent of instructor. 

Percussion Ensemble 
MUSX 
MUSX 011, 012: Percussion Ensemble 
ea. Consists of reading and performance of literature for percussion. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSX 021, 022: Percussion Ensemble 
ea. Continuation of MUSX 011, 012 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUSX 011, 012, or consent of instructor. 

MUSX 031, 032: Percussion Ensemble 
ea. Continuation of MUSX 021, 022 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUSX 021, 022, or consent of instructor. 

MUSX 041, 042: Percussion Ensemble 
ea. Continuation of MUSX 031, 032 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUSX 031, 032, or consent of instructor. 

Percussion Major 
MUSW 
MUSW 100: Percussion Instruction 
 Private lessons to non-music major. Permission of coordinator/instructor required. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSW 111, 112: Percussion Minor 
Instruction in major and minor scales and arpeggi, tone production, and etudes and solos in all styles. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSW 121, 122: Percussion Minor 
Continuation of MUSW 111, 112 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSW 111, 112, or consent of instructor. 

MUSW 131, 132: Percussion Minor 
Continuation of MUSW 121, 122 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSW 121, 122, or consent of instructor. 

MUSW 141, 142: Percussion Minor 
Continuation of MUSW 131, 132, with preparation for senior recital 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSW 131, 132, or consent of instructor. 

MUSW 151, 152: Percussion Minor 
Continuation of MUSW 141, 142 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSW 141, 142 or consent of instructor. 

MUSW 211, 212: Percussion Major 
Includes major and minor scales and arpeggi, along with etudes and solos in all styles. 
Credits: 
4 

MUSW 221, 222: Percussion Major 
Continuation of MUSW 211, 212, with preparation for qualifying recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSW 211, 212, or consent of instructor. 

MUSW 231, 232: Percussion Major 
Continuation of MUSW 221, 222 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSW 221, 222, or consent of instructor. 

MUSW 241, 242: Percussion Major 
Continuation of MUSW 231, 232, with preparation for senior recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSW 231, 232, or consent of instructor. 

Piano 
MUSE 
MUSE 011, 012: Functional Piano I & II 
ea. Scales, chords, arpeggios, transposition, and harmonization for students with minimal background in piano. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSE 021, 022: Functional Piano III & IV 
ea. Continuation of MUSE 011, 012. Preparation for the proficiency examination 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSE 011, 012, or consent of instructor. 

MUSE 031, 032: Functional Piano 
ea. Continuation of MUSE 021, 022. Preparation for the proficiency examination 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUSE 021, 022. 

MUSE 041, 042: Functional Piano 
ea. Continuation of MUSE 031, 032. Preparatioon for the Proficiency Exam. Prereqs. MUSE 031,032. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSE 100 and 101: Beginning Piano for Non-Music Majors 
ea. Class lessons to non-music major. Permission of coordinator/instructor required. Course can be repeated. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSE 102 and 103: Beginning Piano for Non-Music Majors 
ea. Class lessons for non-music majors. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of instructor or MUSE 100, 111. Course can be repeated. 

MUSE 111, 112: Piano Minor I & II 
Study of the basic principles of piano playing, including scales, arpeggios, easy etudes, and Bach. 
Credits: 
4 

MUSE 121, 122: Piano Minor III & IV 
Includes scales, arpeggios (four octaves), Bach’s “Little Preludes,” sonatinas, and selected compositions from the Romantic and Modern eras. Prereqs.MUSE 111, 112, or consent of instructor. 
Credits: 
4 

MUSE 131, 132: Piano Minor 
Continuation of technical work with Czerny’s Opus 299; Bach’s Two-Part Inventions, and Haydn’s sonatas. Prereqs. MUSE 121, 122, or consent of instructor. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSE 141, 142: Piano Minor 
Expansion of technical work, including Bach’s WTC, sonatas of Mozart and Haydn, and selected Romantic and Contemporary works. Recital required 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSE 131, 132, or consent of instructor. 

MUSE 151, 152: Piano Minor 
Further expansion of technical work, including Bach’s WTC sonatas, Romantic and Modern compositions. Recital required 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSE 141, 142. 

MUSE 153, 154: Vocal Accompanying 
Provides technical and practical experience in the art of accompanying. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSE 157, 158: Piano Pedagogy I & II 
Instruction in teaching piano at all levels, with lecture, discussion, and demonstration. 
Credits: 
4 

MUSE 171: Piano Literature 
A survey of solo keyboard works, English Virginalists to Beethoven, performance, stylistic analysis. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSE 172: Piano Literature 
A survey of solo keyboard works, Schubert to present, performance, stylistic analysis. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSE 211, 212: Piano Major I & II 
Scales and arpeggios (four octaves), Czerny’s Opus 299, Bach’s Two- and Three-Part Inventions; Haydn’s and Mozart’s sonatas, and Romantic works. 
Credits: 
6 

MUSE 221, 222: Piano Major III & IV 
Scales, Czerny, Cramer studies, Bach’s WTC, and sonatas. Qualifying Recital 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
MUSE 211, 212, or consent of instructor. 

MUSE 231, 232: Piano Major V & VI 
Continuation of technical and repertory work, with a technical examination 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
MUSE 221, 222, or consent of instructor. 

MUSE 241, 242: Piano Major VI & VII 
Continuation of MUSE 231, 232. Public graduation recital 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
MUSE 241, 242, or consent of instructor. 

Piano Trio 
MUSZ 
MUSZ 111, 112: Piano Trio Minor I & II 
Focuses on advanced harmonic and rhythmic studies for the pianist and the rhythm section. Various styles included. Rhythmic comping and the use of rhythmic motif displacement as a comping and soloing technique in various styles.   ea. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSZ 121, 122: Piano Trio (Ens) III & IV 
Focuses on advanced harmonic and rhythmic studies for the pianist and the rhythm section. Various styles included. Rhythmic comping and the use of rhythmic motif displacement as a comping and soloing technique in various styles.   ea. Continuation of MUSZ 111, 112 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSZ 111, 112, or consent of instructor. 

MUSZ 131, 132: Piano Trio Minor VI 
ea. Continuation of MUSZ 121, 122 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUSZ 121, 122, or consent of instructor. 

MUSZ 141, 142: Piano Trio Minor VII,VIII 
ea. Continuation of MUSZ- of 131, 132 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUSZ 131, 132, or consent of instructor. 

MUSZ 211, 212: Piano Trio Major I,II 
Includes chamber music for piano and other instruments 
Credits: 
1 

MUSZ 221, 222: Piano Trio Major III,IV 
Continuation of MUSZ 211, 222 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUSZ 211, 212, or consent of instructor. 

MUSZ 322: Piano Trio (Ens.) II 
Credits: 
1 

Saxophone 
MUSQ 
MUSQ 100: Saxophone Instruction 
 Private lessons to non-music major. Permission of coordinator/instructor required. Course can be repeated. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSQ 111, 112: Saxophone Minor 
Includes major and minor scales and arpeggi, tone production, and etudes and solos in all styles. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSQ 121, 122: Saxophone Minor 
Continuation of MUSQ 111, 112 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSQ 111, 112, or consent of instructor. 

MUSQ 131, 132: Saxophone Minor 
Continuation of MUSQ 121, 122 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSQ 121, 122, or consent of instructor. 

MUSQ 141, 142: Saxophone Minor 
Continuation of MUSQ 131, 132, with preparation for senior recital 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSQ 131, 132, or consent of instructor. 

MUSQ 211, 212: Saxophone Major 
Includes major and minor scales and arpeggi, along with etudes and solos in all styles. 
Credits: 
4 

MUSQ 221, 222: Saxophone Major 
Continuation of MUSQ 211, 212, with preparation for qualifying recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSQ 211, 212, or consent of instructor. 

MUSQ 231, 232: Saxophone Major 
Continuation of MUSQ 221, 222 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSQ 221, 222, or consent of instructor. 

MUSQ 241, 242: Saxophone Major 
Continuation of MUSQ 231, 232, with preparation for senior recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSQ 231, 232, or consent of instructor. 

Saxophone Ensemble 
MUTD 
MUTD 111, 112: Saxophone Ensemble 
ea. Ensemble that performs contemporary literature for the saxophone and transcribed literature. 
Credits: 
1 

MUTD 121, 122: Saxophone Ensemble 
ea. Continuation of MUTD 111, 112 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTD 111, 112, or consent of instructor. 

MUTD 131, 132: Saxophone Ensemble 
ea. Continuation of MUTD 121, 122 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTD 121, 122, or consent of instructor. 

MUTD 141, 142: Saxophone Ensemble 
ea. Continuation of MUTD 131, 132 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTD 131, 132, or consent of instructor. 

Jazz 
MUSH 
MUSB 116: Keyboard Harmony 
 Advanced harmonization, and keyboard improvisation and score reading. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSH 011, 012: Jazz Improvisation I & II 
Techniques of improvisation, melodic and harmonic analysis, analysis of improvisational styles through recorded example, demonstration of improvisational skills through performance, and transcription of recorded solos. 
Credits: 
4 

MUSH 012: Improvisation II 
Techniques of improvisation, melodic and harmonic analysis, analysis of improvisational styles through recorded example, demonstration of improvisational skills through performance, and transcription of recorded solos. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSH 021, 022: Jazz Improvisation III & IV 
Continuation of MUSH 011, 012 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSH 011, 012, or consent of instructor. 

MUSH 022: Jazz Improvisation III 
Jazz Improvisation III, IV. 2 crs. ea. Continuation of MUSH-011, 012. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
 MUSH-011, 012, or consent of instructor. 

MUSH 031, 032: Jazz Improvisation V & VI 
Continuation of MUSH 021,022 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSH 021, 022, or consent of instructor. 

MUSH 032: Improvisation VI 
Jazz Improvisation V, VI. 2 crs. ea. Continuation of MUSH-021,022. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSH-021, 022, or consent of instructor. 

MUSH 041, 042: Jazz Improvisation VII & VIII 
Continuation of MUSH 031, 032 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSH 031, 032, or consent of instructor. 

MUSH 051: Set Drumming Workshop 
 Development of reading skills, jazz drumming techniques, through solo and ensemble playing. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSH 080: Jazz Theory 
 The meaning of melodic and harmonic notation in jazz is explained; also, the underlying structural principles employed in the jazz composition are revealed. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSH 111: Jazz Arranging I 
 Exploration and analysis of representative jazz arrangements, demonstrating basic techniques of arranging. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSH 130: Jazz Piano 
Comprehensive course for advanced pianists encompassing varied jazz styles and techniques. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSH 131: Jazz Piano 
Continuation of MUSH 130 dealing with advanced jazz piano techniques. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSH 130. 

MUSH 140: Jazz Piano 
Continuation of MUSH 131 dealing with advanced jazz piano techniques. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSH 130, 131. 

MUSH 141: Jazz Piano 
Continuation of MUSH 140 dealing with advanced jazz piano techniques 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSH 130, 131, and 140. 

MUSH 151, 152, 153: Jazz Vocal Workshop 
 Development of jazz solo and group performance skills, including improvisation, sight reading, repertoire and contemporary vocal technique. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSH 161 through 168: Voice for Jazz Studies 
Techniques of breathing, tone development, and vocal styles as they relate to the jazz idiom; development of the standard jazz repertoire. Audition required. 
Credits: 
2 

MUTX 111: Jazz Piano I 
Comprehensive course for advanced pianists encompassing varied jazz styles and techniques. Audition required. 
Credits: 
2 

MUTX 112: Jazz Piano II 
Continuation of MUTX 111. 
Credits: 
2 

MUTX 131: Jazz Piano V 
Continuation of MUTX-122. Includes advanced jazz piano techniques. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUTX-121, 122. 

String Bass 
MUSN 
MUSN 100: String Bass Instruction 
 Private lessons to non-music major. Permission of coordinator/instructor required. Course can be repeated. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSN 101: String Bass Instruction II 
A continuation of MUSN 100. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSN 111, 112: String Bass Minor 
Covers Simandle’s Book 1; Marcello’s Sonata in D Minor; The Progressive Bowing Variations; The Melodious Bass; Bowing Variations; and three Beethoven symphonies. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSN 121, 122: String Bass Minor 
Includes Bille Nos. 263 and 264, Nanny Vingt Quartre Pieces, and orchestra studies 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSN 111, 112, or consent of instructor. 

MUSN 131, 132: String Bass Minor 
Treats Bille Nos. 262 and 303, Handel’s Sonata in G Minor, orchestra studies, and Galliard’s Sonata in F Major 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSN 121, 122, or consent of instructor. 

MUSN 141, 142: String Bass Minor 
Instruction in Bille No. 303; Nanny’s Kreutzer Etudes; Koussevitzky’s Chanson Triste and Valse Miniature, orchestra studies, and recital preparation 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSN 131, 132, or consent of instructor. 

MUSN 211, 212: String Bass Major 
Deals with major and minor scales and arpeggios, along with etudes and solos in all styles. 
Credits: 
4 

MUSN 221, 222: String Bass Major 
Continuation of MUSN 211, and 212 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSN 211, 212, or consent of instructor. 

MUSN 231, 232: String Bass Major 
Continuation of MUSN 221, 222 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSN 221, 222, or consent of instructor. 

MUSN 241, 242: String Bass Major 
Continuation of MUSN 231, 232 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSN 231, 232, or consent of instructor. 

Jazz Ensemble 
MUTI 
MUTI 011, 012: Jazz Ensemble A I, II 
ea. Deals with Big Band Jazz; composing, arranging, performing, and recordings. Auditions required. 
Credits: 
1 

MUTI 021, 022: Jazz Ensemble A III 
 Continuation of MUTI 011 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTI 011, 012, or consent of instructor. 

MUTI 031, 032: Jazz Ensemble A V,VI 
ea. Continuation of MUTI 023 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTI 021, 022, or consent of instructor. 

MUTI 041, 042: Jazz Ensemble A VII, VIII 
ea. Continuation of MUTI 031, 032 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTI 031, 032, or consent of instructor. 

MUTI 051, 052: Jazz Ensemble A IX,X 
A continuation of MUTI 041 and 042 
Credits: 
1 

MUTI 111: Jazztet I 
 Small ensemble and experimental projects in jazz performance. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor. Auditions required 

String Ensemble 
MUTB 
MUTB 111, 112: String Ensemble 
ea. Ensemble for the study and performance of string literature. 
Credits: 
1 

MUTB 121, 122: String Ensemble 
ea. Continuation of MUTB 111, 112 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTB 111, 112, or consent of instructor. 

MUTB 131, 132: String Ensemble 
ea. Continuation of MUTB 121, 122 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTB 121, 122, or consent of instructor. 

MUTB 141, 142: String Ensemble 
ea. Continuation of MUTB 131, 132 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTB 131, 132, or consent of instructor. 

Student Recital 
MUTO 
MUTO 011: Student Recital 
 Performances by students which afford them the opportunity to perform before their peers and others; exposes students to a large variety of musical literature. 
Credits: 
0 

MUTO 012: Student Recital 
Continuation of MUTO 011. 
Credits: 
0 

MUTO 021: Student Recital 
Continuation of MUTO 012. 
Credits: 
0 

MUTO 022: Student Recital 
Continuation of MUTO 021. 
Credits: 
0 

MUTO 031: Student Recital 
Continuation of MUTO 022. 
Credits: 
0 

MUTO 032: Student Recital 
Continuation of MUTO 031. 
Credits: 
0 

MUTO 041: Student Recital 
Continuation of MUTO 032. 
Credits: 
0 

MUTO 042: Student Recital 
Continuation of MUTO 041. 
Credits: 
0 

MUTO 111: Qualifying Recital 
Performances by students which afford them the opportunity to perform before their peers and others; exposes students to a large variety of musical literature. 
Credits: 
0 

MUTO 112: Senior Recital 
Performances by students which afford them the opportunity to perform before their peers and others; exposes students to a large variety of musical literature. 
Credits: 
0 

Music Therapy 
MUSJ 
MUSJ 101: Music Therapy I 
A study of the history of the profession of Music Therapy, and an examination of the philosophy and principles of Music. Therapy Practice in mental health, hospital, and medical and school delivery system with adults and Children. FALL 
Credits: 
3 

MUSJ 102: Music Therapy II 
 A study of the music therapist in the clinical setting, with an emphasis on the client/therapist relationship. Includes an examination of major theories of psychotherapy and their relationship to music therapy practice. Includes group musical tasks and experimental music to encourage students to begin a personal examination of music and its effect upon their own lives. CLINICAL PRACTICUM IS REQUIRED 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSJ 101, MUSJ 105, or permission of instructor. SPRING/FALL 

MUSJ 103: Practicum II 
A continuation of MUSJ 111. A course in which the primary goal is to enhance the student’s previously acquired knowledge and abilities by applying them within a professional setting.  The practicum  is completed under the direction of the faculty in conjunction with a site supervisor.  
Credits: 
0 

MUSJ 105: Clinical Orientation 
 Initial clinical experience involving group participation and observation of methods and techniques employed in therapeutic settings; accompanied by seminar. Prereqs. MUSJ 101, admission to MT degree program, or permission of instructor. SPRING 
Credits: 
2 

MUSJ 107, 108: Guitar Techniques for Music Therapy 
Advanced guitar instruction and study of repertoire with emphasis on adaptive techniques for special populations. Prereqs. MUSJ 101, 2 semesters of MUSO 100. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSJ 110: Methods and Techniques in Music Therapy 
 Experimental overview of techniques used in musical therapy treatment in group and individual therapy employing vocal and instrumental techniques. CLLINICAL PRACTICUM IS REQUIRED. Prereqs. MUSJ 101, admission to MT program or permission of instructor. SPRING 
Credits: 
2 

MUSJ 111: Practicum I 
A course in which the primary goal is to enhance the student’s previously acquired knowledge and abilities by applying them within a professional setting.  The practicum is completed under the direction of the faculty in conjunction with a site supervisor.  
Credits: 
0 

MUSJ 115: Influence of Music on Behavior 
 An examination of humankind’s behavioral, emotional and physical response to music; study of applicable music therapy interventions (GIM, etc.) IINCLUDES CLINICAL PRACTICUM 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MUSJ 101, MUSJ 102, MUSJ 105, admission to MT program or permission of instructor. FALL 

MUSJ 120: Psychology of Music 
A study of the acoustical and psychological aspects of music and related literature. SPRING/FALL 
Credits: 
3 

MUSJ 121: Senior Practicum 
Clinical experience with emphasis on independent planning for individual and group sessions 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSJ 101, MUSJ 102, MUSJ 105, MUSJ 110, MUSJ 115. SPRING 

MUSJ 135: Music Therapy Internship 
 A 6-12 month period of clinical training in a music therapy program (approved by the American Music Therapy Association) under the direct supervision of a music therapist. Prereqs. All music department requirements and all music therapy curriculum courses. SPRING/FALL 
Credits: 
1 

Trombone 
MUSU 
MUSU 100: Trombone Instruction 
 Private lessons to non-music major. Permission of coordinator/instructor required. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSU 111, 112: Trombone Minor 
Includes major and minor scales and arpeggi, tone production, and etudes and solos in all styles. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSU 121, 122: Trombone Minor 
Continuation of MUSU 111, 112 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSU 111, 112, or consent of instructor. 

MUSU 131, 132: Trombone Minor 
Continuation of MUSU 121, 122 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSU 121, 122, or consent of instructor. 

MUSU 141, 142: Trombone Minor 
Continuation of MUSU 131, 132, with preparation for senior recital 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSU 131, 132, or consent of instructor. 

MUSU 211, 212: Trombone Major 
Instruction in major and minor scales and arpeggi, along with etudes and solos in all styles. 
Credits: 
4 

MUSU 221, 222: Trombone Major 
Continuation of MUSU 211, 221 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSU 211, 212, or consent of instructor. 

MUSU 231, 232: Trombone Major 
Continuation of MUSU 221, 222 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSU 221, 222, or consent of instructor. 

MUSU 241, 242: Trombone Major 
Continuation of MUSU 231, 232, with preparation for senior recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSU 231, 232, or consent of instructor. 

Organ 
MUSF 
MUSF 100: Organ Instruction 
 Private lessons to non-music major. Permission of coordinator/instructor required. Course can be repeated. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSF 111, 112: Organ Minor 
Study of Peeters’ The Little Organ Book, Johnson’s Organ Method, and manual and pedal exercises. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSF 121, 122: Organ Minor 
Consists of moderately difficult works by Bach, Mendelssohn, and Brahms; contemporary works; service playing; improvisation; and pedal studies, scales and exercises 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSF 111, 112, or consent of instructor. 

MUSF 131, 132: Organ Minor 
Bach’s Chorale Preludes, Toccata and Fugue in D Minor, Dorian Toccata, and Prelude and Fugue in A Minor, with service playing and improvisation 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSF 121, 122, or consent of instructor. 

MUSF 141, 142: Organ Minor 
Continuation of MUSF 131, 132, provides preparation of senior recital 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSF 131, 132, or consent of instructor. 

MUSF 153: Service Playing 
Literature for church and community use; hymns, responses, preludes, voluntaries, and postludes; accompaniments; modulation; and improvisation. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSF 211, 212: Organ Major 
Bach’s Chorale Preludes for Manuals, Orgelbuchlein (Nos. 27, 44, 37, and 12), Eight Little Preludes, and Fugues (A Minor, F Major, G Minor, and B flat Major), along with easy compositions by contemporary composers, hymn playing, and technique. 
Credits: 
4 

MUSF 221, 222: Organ Major 
Selected preludes, Fantasia and Fugue C Minor, selections from Orgelbuchlein, Brahms’ Chorale Preludes, and Franck’s larger works. Qualifying recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSF 211, 212, or consent of instructor. 

MUSF 231, 232: Organ Major 
Bach’s Chorale Preludes, Toccata and Fugue in D Minor, Dorian Toccata, Prelude and Fugue in A Minor, and Trio Sonata 1; Franck’s Piece Heroique, Prelude, Fugue, and Variation; and Mendelssohn’s Second Sonata; along with selected contemporary works. Service playing and improvisation 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSF 221, 222, or consent of instructor. 

MUSF 241, 242: Organ Major 
Selected works from Bach, Mendelssohn, Franck, and the symphonies of Widor and Vierne; and selected compositions by Alain, Messiaen, Langlais, Fax, Kerr, and others 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSF 241, 242, or consent of instructor. 

Trumpet 
MUSS 
MUSS 100: Trumpet Instructio 
 Private lessons to non-music major. Permission of coordinator/instructor required. Course can be repeated. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSS 111, 112: Trumpet Minor 
Instruction in major and minor scales and arpeggi, tone production, and etudes and solos in all styles. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSS 121, 122: Trumpet Minor 
Continuation of MUSS 111, 112 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSS 111, 112, or consent of instructor. 

MUSS 131, 132: Trumpet Minor 
Continuation of MUSS 121, 122 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSS 121, 122, or consent of instructor. 

MUSS 141, 142: Trumpet Minor 
Continuation of MUSS 131, 132, with preparation for senior recital 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSS 131, 132, or consent of instructor. 

MUSS 211, 212: Trumpet Major 
Includes major and minor scales and arpeggi, along with etudes and solos in all styles. 
Credits: 
4 

MUSS 221, 222: Trumpet Major 
Continuation of MUSS 211, 212, with preparation for qualifying recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSS 211, 212 or consent of instructor. 

MUSS 231, 232: Trumpet Major 
Continuation of MUSS 221, 222 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSS 221, 222, or consent of instructor. 

MUSS 241, 242: Trumpet Major 
Continuation of MUSS 231, 232, with preparation for senior recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSS 231, 232, or consent of instructor. 

Tuba 
MUSV 
MUSV 100: Tuba Instruction 
 Private lessons to non-music major. Permission of coordinator/instructor required. Instruction in major and minor scales and arpeggi, tone production, and etudes and solos in all styles. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSV 111, 112: Tuba Minor 
Instruction in major. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSV 121, 122: Tuba Minor 
Continuation of MUSV 111, 112 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSV 111, 112, or consent of instructor. 

MUSV 131, 132: Tuba Minor 
Continuation of MUSV 121, 122 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSV 121, 122, or consent of instructor. 

MUSV 141, 142: Tuba Minor 
Continuation of MUSV 131, 132, with preparation for senior recital 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSV 131, 132, or consent of instructor. 

MUSV 211, 212: Tuba Major 
Consists of major and minor scales and arpeggi, along with etudes and solos in all styles. 
Credits: 
4 

MUSV 221, 222: Tuba Major 
Continuation of MUSV 211, 212, with preparation for qualifying recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSV 211, 212, or consent of instructor. 

MUSV 231, 232: Tuba Major 
Continuation of MUSV 221, 222. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSV 221, 222, or consent of instructor. 

MUSV 241, 242: Tuba Major 
Continuation of MUSV 231, 232, with preparation for senior recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSV 231, 232, or consent of instructor. 

Piano Technology 
MUSL 
MUSL 100: Violin Instruction 
 Private lessons to non-music major. Permission of coordinator/instructor required. Course can be repeated. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSL 101: Violin Instruction II 
Continuation of MUSL 100. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSL 102: Violin Instruction III 
Continuation of MUSL 101. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSL 103: Violin Instruction IV 
Continuation of MUSL 102. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSL 111, 112: Violin Minor 
Instruction in major and minor scales and arpeggios in three octaves, solo repertoire comparable to Kreutzer’s 42 Etudes, Sevcik’s Opus 9, and concerti by Seitz and Accolay. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSL 121, 122: Violin Minor 
Instruction in scales and arpeggios continued from MUSL 111, 112, and etudes, compositions, concerti, and sonatas 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSL 111, 112, or consent of instructor. 

MUSL 131, 132: Violin Minor 
Continuation of MUSL 122 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSL-MUSP, consent of instructor. 

MUSL 141, 142: Violin Minor 
Continuation of MUSL 132, including preparation for senior recital 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSL 131, 132, or consent of instructor. 

MUSL 211, 212: Violin Major 
Includes scales, arpeggios, double-stopping, bow technique and suitable studies and compositions from early and contemporary areas. 
Credits: 
4 

MUSL 221, 222: Violin Major 
Continuation of MUSL 211, 212, with preparation for qualifying recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSL 211, 212, or consent of instructor. 

MUSL 231, 232: Violin Major 
Includes techniques, etudes, sonatas, compositions, and concerti 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
221, 222, or consent of instructor. 

MUSL 241, 242: Violin Major 
Consists of technique; review and continuation of previous material; study of etudes, sonatas, and concerti; and preparation of senior recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSS, MUST, or consent of instructor. 

University Choir 
MUTL 
MUTL 011, 012: University Choir I & II 
ea. Performing vocal ensemble open to all Howard University students. Auditions and appropriate concert and service attire required. 
Credits: 
2 

MUTL 021, 022: University Choir III & IV 
Continuation of MUTL 011,012. Performing vocal ensemble open to all Howard University students,  Auditions and appropriate concert and service attire required. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUTL 011, 012, or consent of instructor. 

MUTL 031, 032: University Choir V & VI 
Continuation of MUTL 021,022. Performing vocal ensemble open to all Howard University students,  Auditions and appropriate concert and service attire required. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUTL 021, 022, or consent of instructor. 

MUTL 041, 042: University Choir VII & VIII 
Continuation of MUTL 031, 032. Performing vocal ensemble open to all Howard University students,  Auditions and appropriate concert and service attire required. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUTL 031, 032, or consent of instructor. 

University Chorale 
MUTM 
MUTM 011, 012: University Chorale 
ea. Consists of a predominantly a capella group, that performs more difficult literature. Audition required. 
Credits: 
1 

MUTM 021, 022: University Chorale 
ea. Continuation of MUTM 011, 012 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTM 011, 012, or consent of instructor. 

MUTM 031, 032: University Chorale 
ea. Continuation of MUTM 021, 022 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTM 021, 022, or consent of instructor. 

MUTM 041, 042: University Chorale 
ea. Continuation of MUTM 031, 032 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTM 031, 032, or consent of instructor. 

University Collegium 
MUTN 
MUTN 011, 012: University Collegium 
ea. Select group that specializes in the performance of the small Renaissance and Baroque vocal forms. Auditions required. 
Credits: 
1 

MUTN 021, 022: University Collegium 
ea. Continuation of MUTN 011, 012 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTN 011, 012 or consent of instructor. 

MUTN 031, 032: University Collegium 
ea. Continuation of MUTN 021, 022 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTN 021, 022, or consent of instructor. 

MUTN 041, 042: University Collegium 
ea. Continuation of MUTN 031, 032 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTN 031, 032, or consent of instructor. 

Viola 
MUTQ 
MUTQ 100: Viola Instruction 
 Private lessons to non-music major. Permission of coordinator/instructor required. Course can be repeated. 
Credits: 
1 

MUTQ 101, 102, 103: Violin Instruction II-IV 
Continuation of MUTQ 100.  Private lessons to non-music major. Permission of coordinator/instructior required. 
Credits: 
1 

MUTQ 111, 112: Viola Minor 
Study of scales and arpeggios in two octaves; etudes, sonatas, and concerti; and solo repertoire of the difficulty comparable to Masas’ Opus 36 Etudes and Eccles’ Sonata in G Minor. 
Credits: 
2 

MUTQ 121, 122: Viola Minor 
Includes scales, arpeggios, double-stopping, and development of bow techniques 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUTQ 111, 112, or consent of instructor. 

MUTQ 131, 132: Viola Minor 
Continuation of technical studies with classical solo compositions 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUTQ 121, 122, or consent of instructor. 

MUTQ 141, 142: Viola Minor 
Study of scales and broken chords in three octaves through the seventh position, technical studies, etudes, and preparation for senior recital 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUTQ 131, 132, or consent of instructor. 

MUTQ 211, 212: Viola Major 
Instruction in technical studies, etudes, sonatas, and solo repertoire. 
Credits: 
4 

MUTQ 221, 222: Viola Major 
Includes technical studies, scales, arpeggios, double-stopping, and development of bow technique; suitable studies and compositions from early and contemporary eras; and preparation for qualifying recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUTQ 211, 212, or consent of instructor. 

MUTQ 231, 232: Viola Major 
Continuation of MUTQ 221, 222 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUTQ 221, 222, or consent of instructor. 

MUTQ 241, 242: Viola Major 
Continuation of MUTQ 231, 232 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUTQ 231, 232, or consent of instructor. 

Voice 
MUSG 
MUSG 011, 012: Voice Class 
Fundamentals of voice production and problems commonly encountered in music education. Required of music education majors with piano or organ emphasis. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSG 111, 112/001, 002: Voice Minor/Third Subject 
Instruction in the principles of breathing, phonetics, and diction; vocalises for sustained singing; scales and arpeggios; five English songs; and songs of the black heritage. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSG 121, 122/003, 004: Voice Minor/Third Subject 
Consists of vocalises to meet the individual needs of the student, five songs in English and other languages, a German lieder, and easy arias. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSG 131, 132/005, 006: Voice Minor/Third Subject 
A continuation of MUSG 121, 122/003, 004. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSG 141, 142/007, 008: Voice Minor/Third Subject 
Technical Studies, six songs by modern composers. French songs, and two or more arias. Recital required for minors. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSG 155: Solo Vocal Literature 
An exploration of the evolution of Western art song literature from the Classic period to modern day. Students learn to place composers within their historical context and chart the evolution of German, French and American art song, noting characteristics of each genre.  Spring only 
Credits: 
3 

MUSG 157: Diction for Singers II 
Students learn correct pronunciation and articulation for singing literature in French and German. Prerequisite MUSG 156. Spring semester only. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSG 156. 

MUSG 171: Opera Ensemble Workshop I 
The study and performance of arias, opera scenes and operas. Students also learn audition strategies and perform mock auditions. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSG 172: Opera Ensemble Workshop II 
The study and performance of arias, opera scenes and operas. Students also learn audition strategies and perform mock auditions. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSG 173: Opera Ensemble Workshop III 
The study and performance of arias, opera scenes and operas. Students also learn audition strategies and perform mock auditions. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSG 174: Opera Ensemble Workshop IV 
The study and performance of arias, opera scenes and operas. Students also learn audition strategies and perform mock auditions. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSG 211, 212: Voice Major I & II 
Instruction in breathing, phonetics, development of tone, legato singing, agility, and major and minor scales and arpeggios. 
Credits: 
6 

MUSG 221, 222: Voice Major III & IV 
Agility, sustained singing, classical vocal embellishments, and major and minor scales and arpeggios. Preparation for qualifying recital 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
MUSG 211, 212, or consent of instructor. 

MUSG 231, 232: Voice Major V & VI 
Major and minor scales and arpeggios, German art songs, and arias 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
MUSG 221, 222, or consent of instructor. 

MUSG 241, 242: Voice Major VII & VIII 
Major and minor scales and arpeggios; music; German lieder; and Spanish, Russian, and French songs 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
MUSG 231, 232, or consent of instructor. 

MUSG 255: Voice Pedagogy 
A systemic study of voice anatomy and acoustics. Students learn the basic development of the vocal mechanism from childhood to maturity. Focus is placed on teaching K-12 music and private lesson strategies. identification and corrections of vocal defects, exploration of vocal health issues and practice teaching.  Fall only. 
Credits: 
3 

Violoncello 
MUSM 
MUSM 100: Violoncello Instruction 
 Private lessons to non-music major. Permission of coordinator/instructor required. Course can be repeated. 
Credits: 
1 

MUSM 111, 112: Violoncello Minor 
Consists of all major and minor scales and arpeggios in two octaves with various bowings; studies by Lee, Schroeder, Greutzmacher, and Alexanian; and Hindemith’s Three Easy Pieces. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSM 121, 122: Violoncello Minor 
Continuation of MUSM 111, 112 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSM 111, 112, or consent of instructor. 

MUSM 131, 132: Violoncello Minor 
Continuation of MUSM 121, 122 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSM 121, 122, or consent of instructor. 

MUSM 141, 142: Violoncello Minor 
ea. Continuation of MUSM 131, 132, along with preparation of senior recital 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MUSM 131, 132, or consent of instructor. 

MUSM 211, 212: Violoncello Major 
Consists of major and minor scales and arpeggios in three octaves; studies by Schroeder, Popper, Dotzauer, and Klengel; and suitable compositions from string literature. 
Credits: 
4 

MUSM 221, 222: Violoncello Major 
Continuation of MUSM 211, 212. Qualifying recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSM 211, 212, or consent of instructor. 

MUSM 231, 232: Violoncello Major 
Continuation of MUSM 221, 222 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSM 221, 222, or consent of instructor. 

MUSM 241, 242: Violoncello Major 
Continuation of MUSM 231, 232, with preparation for senior recital 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MUSM 231, 232, or consent of instructor. 

Woodwind Ensemble 
MUTC 
MUTC 111, 112: Woodwind Ensemble 
ea. Ensemble for the study and performance of woodwind literature. 
Credits: 
1 

MUTC 121, 122: Woodwind Ensemble 
ea. Continuation of MUTC 111, 112 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTC 111, 112, or consent of instructor. 

MUTC 131, 132: Woodwind Ensemble 
ea. Continuation of MUTC 121, 122 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTC 121, 122, or consent of instructor. 

MUTC 141, 142: Woodwind Ensemble 
ea. Continuation of MUTC 131, 132 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MUTC 141, 142, or consent of instructor. 

MUTC 201: Flute Ensemble I 
Ensemble for the study and performance of flute literature. 
Credits: 
1 

MUTC 202: Flute Ensemble II 
A continuation of MUTC 201. 
Credits: 
1 

Entertainment Law 
MUSI 
MUSI 031, 032: Introduction to Entertainment Law. 100-305 
An introductory course for all artists which explores contracts, torts, agency, labor relations, copyrights and communications. Fall/Spring. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSI 032: Intro Entertainment law 
An introductory course for all artists which explores contracts, torts, agency, labor relations, copyrights and communications. Fall/Spring. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSI 076: Intro to Music Technology I 
This course introduces the principal topics of music technology: acoustics, computers, MIDI, digital audio, and tools for music production and scoring. Hands-on experience will be used extensively to enhance understanding 
Credits: 
3 

MUSI 077: Intro to Music Technology II 
A continuation of MUSI 076. This course introduces the principal topics of music technology: acoustics, computers, MIDI, digital audio, and tools for music production and scoring. Hands-on experience will be used extensively to enhance understanding 
Credits: 
3 

MUSI 101: Jazz Theory I 
A study of jazz music theory, including chord and scale construction and nomenclature; elementary principles of chord voicing an arrangements; chord/scale relationships; and blues, AABA and other song forms. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSI 102: Jazz Theory II 
A continuation of MUSI 101. A study of jazz music theory, including chord and scale construction and nomenclature; elementary principles of chord voicing an arrangements; chord/scale relationships; and blues, AABA and other song forms. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSI 110, 111: Jazz History I & II 
(undergraduate). Study of the historical development of jazz from the African heritage to the present. 
Credits: 
6 

MUSI 112: Jazz Seminar 
Reports and discussions of topics relevant to the jazz idiom. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSI 143: Vocal Arranging II 
This course is designed to teach and develop advanced skills as an arranger of vocal and instrumental ensembles. Chord chart writing and arranging techniques relevant to the rhythm section (keyboards, bass, guitar, drums, and percussion) and contemporary rhythm idioms will be explained and studied. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSI 160: Vocal Arranging I 
This course is designed to teach and develop advanced skills as an arranger of vocal and instrumental ensembles. Chord chart writing and arranging techniques relevant to the rhythm section (keyboards, bass, guitar, drums, and percussion) and contemporary rhythm idioms will be explained and studied. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSI 183: Jazz Arranging I 
This courses concentrate on writing musical arrangements for small ensembles consisting of one, two & three horns plus rhythm section. For each of the three instrumentations we will address several basic arranging techniques. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSI 184: Jazz Arranging II 
A continuation of MUSI 183. This courses concentrate on writing musical arrangements for small ensembles consisting of one, two & three horns plus rhythm section. For each of the three instrumentations we will address several basic arranging techniques. 
Credits: 
3 

MUSI 193: Jazz Bass Workshop IV 
This workshop covers the history of the jazz bass and basics of building great bass lines. 
Credits: 
2 

MUSI 232: Intro to Enter. Law 
An introductory course for all artists which explores contracts, torts, agency, labor relations, copyrights and communications. 
Credits: 
3 

Philosophy 
PHIL 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
PHIL 051: Principles of Reasoning 
Presents the basic principles and criteria of critical analysis and elementary logic. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 053: Introduction to Philosophy of Science 
Introduces the structure, process, and scope of scientific inquiry and discusses its application in the world. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 055: Introduction to Philosophy 
Examination of the basic concepts and principles of philosophy concerning being, nature, knowledge, freedom, and God. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 057: Introduction to Ethics 
Critical analysis of some representative standards of moral conduct, with special consideration of their practical application. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 059: Knowledge and Value 
Examination of the procedures used in supporting knowledge claims and value judgments. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 082: Honors Philosophy: Representative Thinkers 
Sophomore Honors course on selected Western thinkers and developments in logical theory. One semester is required. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 082, 083: Representative Thinkers 
Systematic inquiry into the philosophy of nature and man based on the outstanding works of selected thinkers who have influenced Western thought and civilization. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 084, 085: Directed Readings for Sophomores 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
1 

PHIL 088, 089: Directed Readings for Juniors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
1 

PHIL 092, 093: Senior Departmental Honors 
Focuses on topics related to participation in the Honors Program. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 102: Philosophy of Life 
An examination of the meaning of life from various perspectives. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 106: Problems of Philosophy 
Examination and application of the methods of analysis to problems of philosophy. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 110: Classical Ethics 
Analysis of the nature of moral conduct, good and evil, vice and virtue, and other topics in ethics as they are treated by such classical moralists as Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Bentham, Mill, and Kant. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 112: Introduction to Social and Political Philosophy 
An introduction to the traditional themes of political philosophy concerning justice, the individual and society, and the best and worst regimes. Readings from Plato to Habermas. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 113: Philosophy of Literature 
Considers three questions through close study of great writers of literature, such as Euripides, Plato, Aristotle, Shakespeare, Kafka, Camus, Heidegger, Nietzsche, Sartre, Derrida and Harris. The three questions: “What do philosophers have to learn from literature? In what sense does literature convey “truth?” How does one go about interpreting a text?” 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 114: Feminist Philosophy 
An exploration of the various approaches to the philosophical study and analysis of the experience and perspectives of women. These include the liberal, marxist, socialist and post-modernist approaches to feminism. The course will focus especially on the perspectives of African-American women. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 120: Introduction to Existentialism 
Study of the primary themes in existentialism, with special emphasis on the differences between its humanistic and theistic branches. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 130: Independent Study 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 140: Contemporary Moral Issues 
A philosophical analysis of moral issues confronting contemporary society: violence, welfare, abortion, assisted suicide, war, affirmative action. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 141: Topics in Philosophy of Language 
This course is an investigation of specific topics in philosophy of language with specific focus on African-American issues. Topics will vary from time to time. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 142: Topics in African Philosophy 
An investigation of specific topics in contemporary African Philosophy. Topics vary from time to time. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 143: Topics in African-American Philosophy 
An investigation of specific topics in contemporary African-American Philosophy. Topics vary from time to time. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 144: Philosophy of Religion 
Considers the conceptions of God and the religious life in relation to problems of knowledge and value. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 145: Islamic Philosophy 
A study of Islamic philosophy, focusing on major texts and systems. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 146: Latin American Philosophy 
Investigation of the major philosophical systems in Latin America. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 147: Ethics and Public Policy 
Philosophical investigation of the role of ethics in the formulation and execution of public policy in education, defense, health, housing, environment, etc. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 148: Environmental Ethics 
Consideration of ethical issues in our interaction with the environment, including the impact of developments in technology. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 149: Philosophy of Martin Luther King, Jr 
A study of the major philosophical writings of Martin Luther King, Jr. focusing on his principle of non-violence. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 150: Epistemology 
Investigation of the possibility, sources, nature, and scope of knowledge, with examination of both classical and contemporary texts. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 151: Metaphysics 
Examination of the fundamental nature of reality, including such topics as existence, space, time, infinity, causation, possibility, and actuality. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 152: Aesthetics 
An introduction to aesthetics; a variety of theories of art, aesthetic analysis, and aesthetic judgment reviewed and evaluated, and the nature and role of the creative process in human experience are analyzed. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 153: Philosophy of Culture 
A philosophical analysis of culture in its various aspects and an investigation of the cultural foundations of philosophical speculations. Issues to be discussed include the meaning of culture, varieties of cultural experiences, cultural identity, cultural pluralism, culture conflict. The course will also focus on issues of race, racism and racial conflict. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 154: Phenomenology 
An examination of contemporary continental thought emphasizing the phenomenological philosophies of Husserl, Heidegger, Jaspers, Merleau-Ponty, and Sartre. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 155: Philosophy of Law 
Treats the principles of jurisprudence in classical texts and recent cases. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 156: Pragmatism 
An examination of the philosophy of pragmatism focusing on the contributions of its representative thinkers including Pierce and William James and on its contributions in the fields of epistemology, ethics and religion. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 157: Philosophical Assumptions and Social Conflict 
Analysis of philosophical principles applicable in the explanation and evolution of social conflict, with attention given to the meaning and philosophical roots of such notions as culture, nationalism, racism, and totalitarianism. Includes comparative studies of rights, anarchism, and violence. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 158: Business and Professional Ethics 
An analysis of the ethical issues raised in business practices and professional activities. Issues to be discussed include the social responsibility of business, ethical issues raised by advertising, whistle blowing, Employment Rights, Self-regulation and Theories of Economic Justice. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 159: Philosophy of Economics 
Does the difference between the subject-matter of natural sciences and economics indicate an unbridgeable gulf between the methodologies of the two disciplines? What kind of science is economics? Is economics value-free or value-neutral? These are the main questions to be addressed in this course. The issue of economic justice will also be discussed. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 160: Pre-Socratic Philosophy 
Deals with the birth of Greek philosophy, from prephilosophical world views to systems of the Pythagoreans and atomists. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 161: Introduction to Plato 
Study of one or more of Plato’s Dialogues, with attention to the dramatic context as well as philosophical argument. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 162: African-American Philosophy 
An examination of the nature of philosophy and a reflection on African-American perspectives in philosophy. The course focuses especially on the context of African-American experience, issues of justice, freedom and identity. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 163: Medieval Philosophy 
Major figures in Latin and Arabic traditions, from Augustine through Ockham. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 164: Current Topics 
The content of this course varies from semester to semester. It may focus on issues such as the philosophy of technology, on the thought of a current or recent thinker or on an interdisciplinary theme. The course content is announced several months prior to the date the course is offered. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 165: German Idealism 
Explores the texts of the chief exponents of German idealism, especially Kant, Fichte, and Hegel. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 166: Philosophy of Language 
Analysis of the philosophical problems raised by the use of language, including theories meaning and the relationship between language, thought and reality. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 167: Hermeneutics or Philosophy of Interpretation 
A study of selected texts in the history of interpretation and hermeneutics, with an eye to answering questions such as “Is there such a thing as an “objective” interpretation of a text?” 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 168: Seminar on Heidegger 
A study of the thought of Martin Heidegger. Normally several of Heidegger’s books are examined and Heidegger’s place in Existentialism, as well as the history of philosophy, are discussed. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 169: Seminar on Nietzsche 
A study of the thought of F. Nietzsche. Normally several of Nietzsche’s books are studied with an eye to Nietzsche’s relationship to classical philosophy and his influence on modern philosophy (especially on Existentialism and on Deconstruction). 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 170: Ancient Greek Philosophy 
Reviews philosophers from ancient Greece through the Middle Ages, including the pre-Socratics, Plato, Aristotle. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 171: Ancient Egyptian Philosophy 
An investigation of the contributions of ancient Egypt to philosophical scholarship; including the mutual borrowings that occurred between ancient Egypt and ancient Greece. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 172: African Philosophy 
Critical examination of such traditional and modern concepts in African thought as life or existence, time, the universe, man and his place in the universe, and God. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 173: The Ethics of Medical Care 
Examination of such primary topics as the morality of abortion, euthanasia, and human experimentation. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 174: Philosophy of Natural Science 
Analysis of discovery, explanation, and revolution in the natural sciences, with emphasis on the role of models. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 175: Symbolic Logic 
Presents the principles and techniques of analyzing and evaluating deductive arguments through symbolic representation of logical structure. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 176: Contemporary Ethics 
Examination of recent ethical systems. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 177: Philosophy of Social Science 
Investigation of the philosophical problems raised by method and theory in the social sciences. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 178: Philosophy of Mind 
Exploration of the concept of a person, the unconscious, and the alleged privacy of mental phenomena. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 179: History of Africana Philosophy 
an historical account of African and African/American philosophy from 1800 to the present. The focus of the course is on thinkers who have contributed to the shaping of African thought in the 19th and 20th centuries. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 180: Value Theory 
Investigation of the general theory of value, with reference to the value problems of ethics, political theory, aesthetics, and religion. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 181: Philosophy of Logic 
Discussion of views on the nature of logic and the status of its principles, with readings from Frege, Lewis, Strawson, and Quine. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 182: Seminar on Plato 
Reading of selected middle and late dialogues, including Parmenides, Theaetetus, Sophist, and Philebus. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 183: Seminar on Aristotle 
Reading of the Physics, De Anima, and Metaphysics. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 184: Modern Philosophy: 17th &18th Century 
Study of representative philosophers since the Renaissance, with special attention given to Descartes, Sponoza, Leibniz, Hume, Kant, and Hegel. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 185: Rationalism and Empiricism 
Analysis of theories of knowledge of representative modern and contemporary writers. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 186: Philosophy of Kant 
Examination of the Critique of Pure Reason. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 187: Philosophy of Hegel 
Study of selected philosophical works, with attention to the Phenomenology of Spirit. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 188: Philosophy of Kierkegaard 
Consideration of the major works of Kierkegaard and their influence on contemporary thought. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 189: Nineteenth-Century Philosophy 
Study of idealism and naturalism, with attention to Schopenhauer, Hegel, Nietzsche, Marx, Comte, and J. S. Mill. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 190: Contemporary Philosophy 
An examination of present philosophical tendencies. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 191: Meaning and Truth 
Analysis of problems around the related notions of meaning and truth, including issues in the study of mind and language. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 192: American Philosophy 
Review of the dominant traditions in American thought, including Calvinism, transcendentalism, idealism, pragmatism, and realism. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 193: Comparative Philosophy 
A comparative analysis of the contemporary philosophical orientations of Western, African and Latin-American thought, focusing on ethics, metaphysics, social and political philosophy and on representative schools and individuals. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 194: Philosophy of History 
Consideration of critical and speculative theories of history, with attention to methodology, causation, and values. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 195: Philosophy of Education 
Analysis of modern theories of education, with attention to the philosophical implications of contemporary experimental techniques. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 196: Senior Colloquium 
Introduces students to topical philosophical issues through the format of colloquium in which students meet with invited philosophers who have worked on the issues. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 197: Philosophy of William James 
Systematic study of James’ thought, with attention to such crucial themes as moralism, pragmatism, and pure experience. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 198: Seminar in Kant’s Ethics 
Reading of the Critique of Practical Reason and the Metaphysics of Morals (Part II). 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 199: Asian Philosophy 
Investigation of four fundamental problems of Oriental philosophical traditions: man, the nature of the universe, norms of the moral life, and the validity of knowledge claims, with attention given to methodologies of Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, and Taoism. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 200: Senior Seminar 
Investigation of a specific philosophical problem in a seminar format. Topics vary from time to time. 
Credits: 
3 

PHIL 210: Senior Honors Thesis 
Provides students the opportunity to work on a philosophical project with a faculty member. The outcome must be a thesis that is defended before a faculty committee. The oral defense shall be open to students. 
Credits: 
3 

Physics 
PHYS 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
 
PHYS 001: General Physics I (Laboratory) 
These lecture-laboratory-recitation courses deal with mechanics, heat, and sound in PHYS-001; and light, electricity and magnetism, and modern physics in PHYS-002; and are algebra-based. 
Credits: 
5 
Prerequisites: 
algebra, trigonometry. 

PHYS 001, 002: General Physics 
These lecture/laboratory/recitation courses deal with mechanics, heat, sound, (in PHYS 001) light, electricity and magnetism, and modern physics (in PHYS 002); and are algebra-based. 5 crs. ea. 
Credits: 
5 
Prerequisites: 
algebra, trigonometry. 

PHYS 002: General Physics I (Laboratory) 
These lecture-laboratory-recitation courses deal with mechanics, heat, and sound in PHYS-001; and light, electricity and magnetism, and modern physics in PHYS-002; and are algebra-based. 
Credits: 
5 
Prerequisites: 
algebra, trigonometry. 

PHYS 002: General Physics I (Laboratory) 
These lecture-laboratory-recitation courses deal with mechanics, heat, and sound in PHYS-001; and light, electricity and magnetism, and modern physics in PHYS-002; and are algebra-based. 
Credits: 
5 
Prerequisites: 
algebra, trigonometry. 

PHYS 003: Mathematical Methods for General Physics 
Review and applications of basic mathematics encountered in General Physics 001, 002, 007 and 009. Problems and practical work will be stressed. Not open for credit for students taking General Physics 013, 014, and 015. 
Credits: 
3 

PHYS 007: Physics for Allied Health Students 
This lecture/laboratory/recitation course treats the topics of general physics, with emphasis on examples for nursing and allied health students. 
Credits: 
5 

PHYS 008: Physics for Architecture Students 
Lecture/recitation course treats mechanics, gravity, sound, thermodynamics, fluids, electricity, magnetism, light, optics, waves, and some modern physics topics with emphasis on topics of interest to architecture students. 
Credits: 
5 

PHYS 010, 011: General Astronomy I, II 
each semester. Two-semester course. First Semester: Emphasis on the Solar System. Historical attempts to explain the observed phenomena of the sky. Techniques of contemporary astronomical science. Physical nature of the sun and planets. Life beyond Earth. Current ideas about the origin, age and fate of the Solar System. Second Semester: Emphasis on stars and galaxies. Determination of the distribution and the motions of stars and galaxies in space, their physical properties and their life histories. Violent cosmic phenomena. Expansion of the universe. Search for extraterrestrial intelligence. Two hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory each week. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
algebra, and trigonometry. 

PHYS 012: The Astronomical Universe 
Survey course for non-science majors. Historical development of astronomy, structure of the solar system, properties of planets and comets, recent advances in the exploration of space, the sun and its characteristics, origin and age of the solar system. Introduction to telescopes, spectroscopy and electromagnetic radiation. Life and death of stars, structure of galaxies, cosmology of the universe. Results of space age astronomy. Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory each week. 
Credits: 
4 

PHYS 013: General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
This lecture/recitation calculus-based course deals with mechanics, heat and sound. Pre- or Coreqs.: MATH- 156. 
Credits: 
3 

PHYS 014: General Physics for Science and Engineering Students 
This lecture/recitation calculus-based course covers electricity and magnetism, light, and optics. Pre- or Coreqs.: MATH-157. 
Credits: 
3 

PHYS 015: Introduction to Modern Physics 
This lecture/recitation calculus-based course covers modern physics topics. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PHYS 014 and MATH 156, MATH 157. 

PHYS 016: Weather and Society 
This course examines basic weather phenomena, climate variability and climate change, and their associated effects on people. 
Credits: 
3 

PHYS 023, 024, 025: General Physics for Science and Engineering Students Laboratory 
ea. Laboratory courses to accompany General and Modern Physics courses PHYS 013, 014, and 0l5 respectively. 
Credits: 
1 

PHYS 030: Earth and Space Science I 
Topics include an introductory overview; size &distance scale of the Universe; review /introduction to basic physical principles and remote sensing; origins of the Earth &solar system; the solid Earth, its hydrosphere, cryosphere, and atmosphere; and the near-Earth space environment. Laboratory exercises include optics, spectroscopy, study of rocks &minerals, use of star charts &globes and a small reflecting telescope. Also, weather permitting, there may be observing sessions using the Locke Hall Observatory telescope 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
High school algebra, trigonometry, and physics (introductory college chemistry, physics &calculus recommended). 

PHYS 031: Earth and Space Science II 
Topics include the moon and the Earth-moon system; the sun; the solar system (major planets &satellites, and minor members); the stars; the interstellar medium; and galaxies and the Universe. Laboratory exercises include use of star charts &globes and a small reflecting telescope. Also, weather permitting, there may be observing sessions using the Locke Hall Observatory telescope 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PHYS 030. 

PHYS 084, 085: Directed Readings in Honors for Sophomores 
In this Directed Readings course, students are sophomore Physics Majors in the COAS Honors Program who are working with a Faculty Mentor to develop proposals for their Honors Theses. In Sophomore Honors, the student works with the mentor to develop the research question and define the study. 
Credits: 
2 

PHYS 088, 089: Directed Readings in Honors for Juniors I & II 
n this Directed Readings course, students are junior Physics Majors in the COAS Honors Program who are working with a Faculty Mentor to develop proposals for their Honors Theses. In Sophomore Honors, the student works with the mentor to develop the research question and define the study. 
Credits: 
2 

PHYS 092, 093: Senior Departmental Honors 
n this Directed Readings course, students are senior Physics Majors in the COAS Honors Program who are working with a Faculty Mentor to develop proposals for their Honors Theses. In Sophomore Honors, the student works with the mentor to develop the research question and define the study. 
Credits: 
3 

PHYS 140, 141: Introduction to Astronomy and Astrophysics 
Topics include celestial mechanics, light and matter, special relativity, binary systems, stellar spectra, interiors of stars, interstellar medium, stellar evolution, stellar pulsation, massive stars, remnants of stars, terrestrial planets, giant planets, minor bodies in the solar system, galaxies, active galaxies, and cosmology. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Phys. 015, Math 157. 

PHYS 143: Observational Astronomy 
Topics may include data sources, statistics and probability, data modeling, properties of CCD's, photometry and telescopes, spectroscopy, infrared astronomy, high energy astronomy, radio astronomy, and adaptive optics.  Coreq.  Phys.  140 or instructor’s approval. 
Credits: 
3 

PHYS 145: Cosmology & Modern Astrophysics 
Introduction to astronomy and astrophysics. Requires ability to understand mathematical and physical concepts (algebra and trigonometry). 
Credits: 
3 

PHYS 150: Atmospheric Physics I 
Introduction to astronomy and astrophysics for freshmen who are seriously interested in science. Requires ability to understand mathematical and physical concepts (algebra and trigonometry. 
Credits: 
3 

PHYS 154, 155: Introduction to Digital Computer Programming 
Presents the basic concepts applicable to computers in general and coding of actual problems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 007 and consent of instructor. 

PHYS 174: Introduction to Biophysics 
Topics considered include the levels of organization within biological systems, flow of energy in living things with an introduction to the thermodynamic systems utilized in biological research; and an introduction to the physical techniques used in the study of biological systems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PHYS 001 and PHYS 002 or PHYS 013 and PHYS 014. 

PHYS 175: Thermodynamics 
Introduces the laws of thermodynamics and applications, along with kinetic theory and statistical mechanics. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PHYS 002 or PHYS 013 and MATH 157 and MATH 159. 

PHYS 176: Optics 
Explores refraction, optical instruments, interference, diffraction, and polarization. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PHYS 002 or PHYS 013 and MATH 157 and MATH 159. 

PHYS 178: Electricity and Magnetism I 
Course that covers electrostatics, magnetostatics, electric circuits, Maxwell’s equations and electromagnetic waves. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PHYS 002 or PHYS 014, and MATH 156, MATH 157, and MATH 159. 

PHYS 178, 179: Electricity and Magnetism I & II 
One-year intermediate level course that covers electrostatics, magnetostatics, electric circuits, Maxwell’s equations and electromagnetic waves. 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
PHYS 002 or PHYS 014, and MATH 156, MATH 157, and MATH 159. 

PHYS 180, 181: Electronic Physics 
This lecture/laboratory course provides a solid background in analog and digital electronics and instrumentation. The first semester involves mostly analog electronics and the second semester mostly digital electronics. 
Credits: 
3 

PHYS 182: Physical Mechanics I 
This course examines particle and rigid body dynamics, central forces, vector analysis, oscillatory motion, and Lagrangian mechanics. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PHYS 001 or PHYS 013, and MATH 156, MATH 157, MATH 159. 

PHYS 182, 183: Physical Mechanics I & II 
This one-year course examines particle and rigid body dynamics, central forces, vector analysis, oscillatory motion, and Lagrangian mechanics. 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
PHYS 001 or PHYS 013, and MATH 156, MATH 157, MATH 159. 

PHYS 186: Observational Techniques 
The use of a modern research telescope and its accessories. Time, coordinates, star charts and catalogues. Astronomical photography. Photoelectric photometry. Spectroscopic observations. Data reduction techniques. Two lectures and an observing or laboratory session each week. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
An introductory astronomy course, General Physics, calculus. 

PHYS 190: Quantum Physics I 
Presents atomic, molecular, solid-state, and nuclear physics, along with elements of relativity and quantum theory. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PHYS 183 and MATH 156, MATH 157, MATH 159. 

PHYS 190, 191: Quantum Physics I & II 
Presents atomic, molecular, solid-state, and nuclear physics, along with elements of relativity and quantum theory. 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
PHYS 183 and MATH 156, MATH 157, MATH 159. 

PHYS 192, 193: Introduction to Mathematical Physics 
Treats vectors and tensors, linear transformations, complex variables, calculus of residues, partial differential equations of physics, Green’s functions, Strum-Liouville theory, orthogonal functions, and Fourier transform methods. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
consent of instructor. 

PHYS 194, 195: Experimental Physics I and II 
Research training including data reduction and error analysis for physicists. Topics include instrumental and statistical uncertainties, propagation of error, probability distributions, method of least squares, curve fitting, and experimental design. Selected experiments in mechanics, heat, optics, electricity and magnetism, atomic and nuclear physics, and electronics, and computer programming. Technical writing skills for the production of scientific publications and reports are emphasized. The course PHYS 194 is the same as PHYS 702 Experimental Physics WRTG. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PHYS 013/014. 

PHYS 196: Senior Thesis 
Research problems for senior physics majors. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
PHYS 194 and senior status in physics. 

PHYS 702: Exper. Physics I Writing 
Research training including data reduction and error analysis for physicists. Topics include instrumental and statistical uncertainties, propagation of error, probability distributions, method of least squares, curve fitting, and experimental design. Selected experiments in mechanics, heat, optics, electricity and magnetism, atomic and nuclear physics, and electronics, and computer programming. Technical writing skills for the production of scientific publications and reports are emphasized. The course PHYS 194 is the same as PHYS 702 Experimental Physics WRTG. 
Credits: 
3 

Political Science 
POLS 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
 
POLS 001: Introduction to Political Science 
Introduction to the basic concepts and substantive divisions of the field of political science. 
Credits: 
3 

POLS 002: Introduction to Research in Political Science 
Introduction to the various methods and approaches to the analysis of political phenomena used in the field of political science. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 001. 

POLS 003: Introduction to Comparative Politics 
Provides a basic knowledge of the functions of government as a social institution by using a comparative approach. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 001 or POLS 010. 

POLS 004: Introduction to Political Theory 
Examination of theoretical approaches to the study of politics and an analytical introduction to the basic political concepts in their historical context. 
Credits: 
3 

POLS 005: Introduction to African Politics 
Survey of certain concepts of African society as they relate to contemporary political institutions in Africa and a historical view of recent political developments before and after independence. 
Credits: 
3 

POLS 006: Pan-Africanism 
Comparative analysis of political behavior in black communities. Satifies Afro-American studies requirement. 
Credits: 
3 

POLS 007: Introduction to Black Politics 
A general overview of black politics involving (1) a historical analysis of the black political experience, (2) economic and cultural aspects of the black experience, (3) black ideology and theory, (4) measurements of black political power, (5) leadership in black communities and organizations, (6) black political movements, (7) legal aspects of black politics, (8) black political behavior, and (9) critique of the methods of studying black politics. 
Credits: 
3 

POLS 008: Introduction to Political Economy 
Focuses on the interrelationship between the political process and the economic process, involving the production, distribution and consumption of goods and services. Offers a discussion of the basic theoretical approaches that attempt to explain this interrelationship both within and between societies divided into classes, and ethnic or religious groups. 
Credits: 
3 

POLS 010: The National Government of the United States 
Introduction to the origins, development, and organization of the U.S. government. 
Credits: 
3 

POLS 011: State and Local Government 
Examination of the role and functions of state and local government in the U.S. federal system. 
Credits: 
3 

POLS 084, 085: Directed Reading in Honors for Sophomores 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. (For Honors Program students.) 
Credits: 
1 

POLS 088, 089: Directed Reading in Honors for Juniors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. (For Honors Program students.) 
Credits: 
1 

POLS 092, 093: Senior Departmental Honors 
Focuses on topics related to participation in the Honors Program. 
Credits: 
3 

POLS 125: Politics of Emerging Nations 
Survey of the political process in the non-Western world designed to test theories projecting the impact of modernization on governmental structure. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 001. 

POLS 128: International Relations 
Introduction to the basic problems of international relations arising out of the power competition of states, and to the methods for the settlement of international disputes. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 001 and POLS 003. 

POLS 140: American Political Parties 
Consideration of the operation of parties under the American system of government. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 010. 

POLS 141: American Public Opinion and Pressure Groups 
Examination of public opinion and its effect on political action, with emphasis on opinion formation and measurements, propaganda, and pressure group aims and activities. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 001 or POLS 010. 

POLS 142: American Judicial Process 
Analyses of the federal courts and the relations and powers of federal and state governments. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 001 and POLS 010. 

POLS 143: Black Politics: Electoral and Nonelectoral 
Studies the rise, fall, and reemergence of the black electorate in the United States. Satisfies English writing course requirement. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 001 and POLS 010. 

POLS 144: The American Presidency 
Analyses of the sources, bases, and character of presidential power, with consideration of the relationships of the executive office to government, public, and private groups. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 001 and POLS 010. 

POLS 145: Introduction to Public Administration 
Presents the basic concepts of public administration and the administrative problems of organization, procedure, personnel, financial administration, administrative law, and public relations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 001 and POLS 010. 

POLS 146: Public Personnel Administration 
Study of the basic principles of personnel management applicable to both public service and private enterprise. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 010. 

POLS 147: Seminar in Public Administration: 
Deals with selected problems in organization and program management, concentrating on action programs, goals and priorities, the process of creating new organizations and programs, citizen participation, special-interest control of programs, interprogram coordination, and program evaluation, with particular reference to factors governing success and failure. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 001, POLS 145, and POLS 146. 

POLS 148: Government and Politics of the District of Columbia 
A study of the government and politics of the District of Columbia, focusing on relations between Congress and the local government during the current home rule period. 
Credits: 
3 

POLS 149: Introduction to Public Policy Analysis 
Introduces students to the basic theories and concepts of policy analysis, with particular emphasis on the policy-making process at the federal level; examines such selected policy issues as welfare, health insurance, and housing; and seeks to assess the impact of policy decisions on blacks, the poor, and other minorities. (See also POLS 145, POLS 147, and POLS 148.) 
Credits: 
3 

POLS 150 , 151: Internship in Political Science. 
Limited internship opportunities available to political science majors in the local community, or in federal or local government. Interns work 15-20 hours per week, depending on the agreement and their schedules. Three credit hours may be awarded per semester for each internship. A maximum of six credit hours may be awarded if the student takes POLS 150 (fall semester) and POLS 151 (spring semester). 
Credits: 
3 
- 
6 

POLS 152: Internship III 
Students may register for this course only with the permission of the instructor. Permission will be given to students who win national or regional internship competitions for placements in settings such as the Supreme Court, the White House, and the State Department. Credit hours will be awarded based on the hours per week required by the internship. 
Credits: 
3 
- 
12 

POLS 159: Simulation of International Organizations 
This course examines the organization, role, and performance of regional international organizations through simulation (modeling) augmented by class lectures and briefings at various embassies and diplomatic missions. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the Organization of African Unity (OAU) will be highlighted. Students from various universities will participate. 
Credits: 
3 

POLS 160: American Political Thought 
A study of the origins and development of American political thought from the colonial period to the present. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior standing 

POLS 162: Seminar in Survey Methods 
Allows participants to design and implement a survey. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 002. 

POLS 163: Constitutional Law I (Theory) 
Historical development of constitutional law, demonstrating how the law has grown and changed in relationship to the political and social climate existing at the time. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 001, 010. 

POLS 164: Constitutional Law II 
Presents the rights of individuals and groups under the U.S. Constitution as interpreted by the U.S. Supreme Court in selected landmark cases. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 001, 010. 

POLS 165: Urban Political Economy 
Uses tools of political economy to examine critical urban problems. Concentrates on understanding the political economy perspective as well as applying this analytic approach to the study of such problems as the fiscal crisis of the cities, urban structure and movements, and the crisis in some key areas such as housing, education, employment, poverty, transportation, crime, etc. 
Credits: 
3 

POLS 166: Russian Politics 
An examination of post communist Russia and the international and domestic forces that gave rise to it. The course explores Russian’s foreign and domestic policies and the CIS system. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 003 and 1POLS 28. 

POLS 167: Socialism 
The essentials of modern socialistic thought. Strong emphasis on the basics of Marxism. 
Credits: 
3 

POLS 169: Government and Politics of Southern Africa 
Analyzes the political problems in Angola, Mozambique, Republic of South Africa, Zimbabwe, Lesotho, Botswana, and Swaziland. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 005. 

POLS 170: Government and Politics of Central America and the Caribbean 
Presents the present political developments in Mexico, the Central American republics, and the Caribbean. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 001. 

POLS 171: Government and Politics of South American Countries 
Studies political institutions and structures in Latin American states south of Panama. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 001 and POLS 003. 

POLS 172: Government and Politics of the Far East 
Explores the constitutional structure and political development of Mainland China, Taiwan, Japan, and Korea. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 001. 

POLS 173: Government and Politics of the Middle East and North Africa 
Study of the government structure of countries of the Middle East and Northern Africa. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 001 or POLS 128. 

POLS 174: Government and Politics of South Asia 
Study of nation building in India, Pakistan, Ceylon, and Nepal. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 001. 

POLS 175: Government and Politics of Southeast Asia 
Covers the political situation in Malaysia, Burma, Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam (North and South), and Indonesia. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 001. 

POLS 176: Government and Politics in Tropical Africa 
Examines the political and governmental developments and problems in the states of Tropical Africa. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 005. 

POLS 178: American Foreign Policy 
Survey of the objectives and the formulation of American foreign policy. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 128. 

POLS 179: Foreign Policies of the Major Powers 
Survey of the basic policies of the contemporary major powers: Great Britain, the Soviet Union, France, Germany, Japan, and China. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 128. 

POLS 180: Urban Government and Politics 
Involves study of the urbanization and growth of cities; development, structure, theory, functions, and politics of modern municipalities; and administrative organization and process. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 010. 

POLS 181: The American Legislative Process 
Examination of the machinery and function of lawmaking in the United States. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 010. 

POLS 183: Race and Public Policy 
Combines perspectives from the fields of black politics and public policy and administration to develop a theoretical perspective on the convergence of race and public policy, and a set of policy relevant strategies on important problems and issues of special relevance to the national black community. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 007 and/or POLS 149, or permission of instructors. 

POLS 184: Problems in American Democracy 
Examination of selected major issues of public policy, long-term and current forces, and problems challenging contemporary society. Interdisciplinary in method and content. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
students in the social sciences with junior standing and above; also POLS 001 and POLS 010. 

POLS 185: Political Behavior 
Deals with American political behavior. Covers theory, method and products of scientific study of American politics and American political behavior. Open to majors or minors in political science with junior standing or above. (Offered once a year.) 
Credits: 
3 

POLS 186: Administrative Law 
Study of cases, illustrating how the conduct of public officials is regulated. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 142 or POLS 145. 

POLS 187: Urban Black Politics 
A survey of the major forces at work in the metropolitan area that are radically changing urban and suburban politics, including the politics of social change and of modernization. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Political science majors and minors with junior standing and above; POLS 011. 

POLS 189: Black Political Theory 
Study of developing types of political strategy based on the analysis of various black political situations, utilizing gaming, role playing, systems analysis, and other relevant techniques. 
Credits: 
3 

POLS 190: Classical and Medieval Thought 
Presents political theorists from Plato through the theorists of the medieval period. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Majors or minors with junior standing or above. 

POLS 191: Modern Political Theory 
Study of the ideas and historical social contexts of political theorists of the Renaissance through the nineteenth century. 
Credits: 
3 

POLS 192: Contemporary Approaches to Political Theory 
Study of the ideas and historical-social contexts of twentieth century political theorists. 
Credits: 
3 

POLS 193: Special Topics in Political Theory 
In depth study of important topics and/or writers in political theory. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Open to majors in political science with junior or senior standing. 

POLS 194: Politics of Campaign Management 
Designed to give the student an opportunity to learn and gain experience in the practical aspects of politics. Where convenient, direct involvement in political campaigns will provide first-hand experience. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior, senior, or graduate standing. 

POLS 195: Nationalism and Revolution 
Explores the theories of revolution in modern times, the relationship between nationalism and revolution, and their impact in selected countries. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior status or above. 

POLS 196: Seminar in Black Politics 
Seeks to develop accurate conceptualization of the substance of black political behavior by examining interaction between the class and real political situations. A secondary, though no less important objective, is to apply these concepts to the analysis of ongoing problems with which the black community is chronically confronted. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 143 and junior status. 

POLS 197: Comparative Political Parties 
Comparative analysis of political party systems of selected countries. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 001 open to majors and minors with junior standing or above. 

POLS 198: The United Nations and Regional Organization 
Study of the origin, structure, procedure, and current status of the United Nations and an analysis of the structure and functions of various regional organizations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 128. 

POLS 199: Behavioral Research Methods 
The fundamentals of Research Design, data collection and analysis, elementary statistics and computer use. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
POLS 002. 

Psychology 
PSYC 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
 
PSYC 001: Foundations of Psychological Science (Majors/Minors Only) 
This introductory course is designed for Psychology Majors/Minors Only. Lectures and labs will provide an introduction to the scientific study of behavior and mental processes, offering an in-depth exploration of major topics in the field with special attention to biological determinants of behavior, learning and memory, developmental and cognitive processes, social behavior in group settings, personality theories, psychological disorders and therapies. 
Credits: 
4 

PSYC 002: Research Design and Analysis 
This course provides an introduction to the research process, research design, and analytic methods.  Throughout the course, students engage in critical thinking to explore both quantitative and qualitative research designs and analytic techniques that are common in psychological science. By the end of the course, students will be able to identify and describe the most appropriate research designs to answer a variety of psychological questions, as well as be able to summarize key features common to quantitative and qualitative research designs used within psychological science. Prereq: 001     
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 001 

PSYC 003: Statistics I 
This course provides an introduction to the research process, research design, and analytic methods.  Throughout the course, students engage in critical thinking to explore both quantitative and qualitative research designs and analytic techniques that are common in psychological science. By the end of the course, students will be able to identify and describe the most appropriate research designs to answer a variety of psychological questions, as well as be able to summarize key features common to quantitative and qualitative research designs used within psychological science. Prereq: 001     
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 001, 002 

PSYC 004: Statistics II 
Continuation of PSYC 003 including confidence intervals, hypothesis tests for comparing proportions, statistical power, analysis of variance, regression analyses, and nonparametric tests. Lectures and laboratory. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 001, 002, 003 

PSYC 011: Capstone Senior Seminar 
 This course is restricted to Psychology Seniors Only. The goal of this course is to provide a culmination of the information you have amassed throughout your undergraduate experience with major courses. Building on the knowledge and experience you have gained as a psychology major, the course readings and discussions are offered as tools to help you consider the options available to you upon graduation, as well as provide strategies that will help you attain your future goals 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
 This course is restricted to Psychology Seniors Only. 

PSYC 012: Seminar in Current Topics 
This course will rotate current topics in psychology each semester.                            Prereq: 050 or 001; 002   
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Prerequisites: 050 or 001; 002 

PSYC 013: Advanced Seminar in Quantitative Research Methods 
This course explores advanced quantitative research concepts, methodological approaches, and analysis techniques. Throughout the course, students learn to design quantitative research studies to answer psychological questions, analyze quantitative psychological data, and write research reports. By the end of the course, students will have an in depth understanding of key features of complex quantitative research data collection approaches and analyses techniques, as well as an in depth understanding of internal, external, construct, and statistical conclusion validity. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Prereq: 001, 002, 003, 004 

PSYC 014: Advanced Seminar in Qualitative Research Methods 
This course explores advanced concepts, debates, and methodological approaches in qualitative inquiry in Psychology. Throughout the course, students engage in designing qualitative research studies to answer psychological questions, analyzing qualitative psychological data, and writing research reports. By the end of the course, students will have an in depth understanding of key features of complex qualitative research data collection approaches and analyses techniques. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Prereq: 001, 002, 003, 004 

PSYC 016: Psychology New Student Orientation 
This introductory course provides a broad overview of the field of psychology and exposes students to the multi-faceted components of psychology as a science through course readings, experiential exercises and assessment assignments. Students will become familiar with research, practice and application areas of psychology, which will serve as a foundation for successfully executing intermediate and advanced courses comprising the psychology major. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Prereq: 001, 002, 003, 004 

PSYC 017: Psychology Research Colloquium 
This course engages students in a lecture series led by experts on various psychological topics, methods, and applications. Students are expected to attend lectures, as well as engage in related reading and writing assignments. Emphasis will be placed on understanding the range of domains of scientific inquiry in the field of psychology and the ways in which research techniques define the types of questions that can be asked at a given level of analysis. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Prereq: 001, 002 

PSYC 020: Abnormal Psychology 
This course provides an examination of the various psychological disorders, as well as theoretical, clinical, and experimental perspectives of the study of psychopathology. Emphasis is placed on terminology, classification, etiology, assessment, and treatment of the major disorders 
Credits: 
3 

PSYC 021: Cognitive Psychology 
This course presents an overview of research on how people perceive, learn, and think about information and the applications for how we engage in daily activities that require human perception, attention, memory, language, reasoning, decision- making, and problem solving. By the end of the course, students will be able to critically evaluate cognitive psychology research and identify the broader social implications of findings 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 050 

PSYC 022: Development Psychology 
This course explores aspects of basic psychological processes throughout the lifespan areas of study include physical, cognitive, and psychological development of a period from infancy to old age. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Prereq: 001, 002 

PSYC 023: Neuropsychology 
This course is designed to provide students with a fundamental understanding of neuropsychological concepts, principles and issues. Students will critically examine the clinical and experimental approaches used in the study of human brain-behavior relations, their influence in generating research questions and their contribution to the understanding of the brain's structural and functional organization. The paradigms that will be examined are organized around the idea that brain functions are influenced by a host of sociocultural, biological, psychological and spiritual factors. Diversity topics (e.g., gender, race/ethnicity, religion, SEP, age) and brain health are considered in the context of these biopsychosocial and spiritual factor 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 050 

PSYC 024: Personality Psychology 
This course provides an introduction to human personality theories, methods, and research. Throughout the course, students explore the scientific study of personality traits, social learning, motives, personalized goals, developmental tasks, defense mechanisms, cognitive schemas, emotional intelligence, and narrative identity. By the end of the course, students will be able to apply personality theories and research methods to improve their own personal effectiveness, as well as to conduct a person centered personality analysis that incorporates sociocultural complexity within lives. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Prereq: 001, 002 
 

PSYC 025: Social Psychology 
A survey of how the social world influences our thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Theories, experimental evidence and real world examples to explain everything from love to aggression, criminal law to marketing and persuasion, as well as prejudice and discrimination 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 001, 002 

PSYC 030: Psychology of the Black Experience 
The psychological experiences of African Americans: historical and current analyses. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 050 

PSYC 031: Cross Cultural Psychology 
The course explores culture-related variations in behavior: culture and cognition, perception and personality. Cross-cultural methods and measurement problems will be considered. 
Credits: 
3 

PSYC 032: Psychology of Gender 
This course builds on intersectionality of gender, race, and sexuality. These dynamic factors are further influenced by written and largely unwritten social policies in the larger social context and the individual’s social ecologic context. Students will explore and analyze the role of how biology, historical legacies, racialized institutions and equity impact and influence gender development and expression. 
Credits: 
3 

PSYC 033: Psychology of Race and Racism 
This course is designed to give the serious student an opportunity to use psychological methods to advance her or his knowledge of racism and its consequences. A central purpose is to provide you the opportunity to think critically about racism.   
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Prereq: 050 or 001 

PSYC 034: Intro to Clinical Psychology 
This introductory course is designed to provide students with a broad overview of the field in clinical psychology. Students will explore the practice of clinical psychology and selected guiding theories, undergraduate/graduate educational requirements, postdoctoral training, licensure, job opportunities for clinical psychologist and continuing educational development. Throughout the semester students will focus on the history and development of clinical psychology, clinical assessment, which includes the clinical interview and psychological testing, clinical interventions, theories of psychotherapy and evidence-based practice.  Emphasis will be placed on special topics related to working with culturally diverse groups.   
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Prereq: 050 

PSYC 035: Health Psychology 
Health psychology is the study of the psychological, biological, and social processes that influence health, illness, and healthcare. It focuses on the psychological, biological, cultural, and behavioral processes that contribute to physical health, illness and overall wellbeing. 
Credits: 
3 

PSYC 036: Learning and Memory 
Data, theories, and issues with an emphasis on human learning. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 050 

PSYC 037: Educational Psychology 
This course will provide a survey of the field of educational psychology. Throughout the course students will explore the development and application of psychological theory to education. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 050 or PSYC 001, 002 

PSYC 038: Psychology of Media 
This course focuses on how aesthetic and creative messages impact on values, motivations, cognitions, attitudes, self psychology and behavior. The course navigates along two tracks: the first track is dedicated to exploring how electronic and social media shape education, the news, our political system, and advertising; the second track is dedicated to understanding how the psychology of film, in particular, changes emotions, attitudes, and behaviors in the viewer 
Credits: 
3 

PSYC 040: Practicum in Psychology 
Open to students who have accumulated at least 24 hours of psychology with a 3.0 average. The course requires the student to do psychological service or research under the supervision of a trained psychologist for 8 hours per week in a departmentally approved setting. In addition to field placements, students will meet together with the instructor one hour per week 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 001, 002 and permission of instructor. 

PSYC 042/043: Independent Research Study 
Individual supervised research and consent of instructor approval. 
Credits: 
1 
- 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 001, 002 

PSYC 044/045: Internship 
This course enables students to receive course credit for an internship experience. Internships must be approved before the student can register for the course. Students are responsible for contacting the Psychology Department Internship Coordinator to inquire about the process for approving internships several months before the semester they plan to register. 
Credits: 
1 
- 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Prereq: 001, 002 

PSYC 050: Introductory Psychology (Non-Majors/Non-Minors Only) 
An introduction to basic concepts in psychology: includes learning, perception, motivation, personality, abnormal, social, and developmental psychology. 
Credits: 
3 

PSYC 051: Experimental Psychology 
Laboratory exercises in learning, perception, and cognition. 
Credits: 
4 

PSYC 063: Research methods and Statistics, 
This lecture/laboratory course teaches descriptive statistics, probability theory, statistical inference, and correlation in the context of research problems. 
Credits: 
4 

PSYC 064: Research Methods and Statistics II 
Continuation of PSYC 063, including analysis of variance, selected comparisons regressions analysis, and nonparametric methods. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 063. 

PSYC 084, 085: Directed Readings in Honors for Sophomores 
In this Directed Readings course, students are sophomore Psychology Majors in the COAS Honors Program who are working with a Faculty Mentor to develop proposals for their Honors Theses. In Sophomore Honors, the student works with the mentor to develop the research question and define the study. Prereq: 001, 002 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Prerequisites 001, 002 

PSYC 088, 089: Directed Readings in Junior Honors 
In this Directed Readings course, students are junior Psychology Majors in the COAS Honors Program who are working with a Faculty Mentor to develop proposals for their Honors Theses. In Junior Honors, the student’s research project is well-defined in advance of completing the theses. 
Credits: 
1 

PSYC 092, 093: Directed Readings in Senior Honors 
In this Directed Readings course, students work with a Faculty Mentor to finalize their Senior Honors Theses, which are due Spring semester in order for the student to graduate with COAS Honors. 
Credits: 
3 

PSYC 102: Perception 
Sensory and perceptual processes and their dynamics.Prerequisite: PSYC 060 and PSYC 063. 
Credits: 
3 

PSYC 105: Learning 
Data, theories and issues with an emphasis on human learning. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 050 and PSYC 063. 

PSYC 110: Brain and Behavior 
Examines the relationship between brain function and behavior 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 050. 

PSYC 116: Abnormal Psychology 
The psychology of behavior disorders.Prerequisites: PSYC 050 and PSYC 052. 
Credits: 
3 

PSYC 118: Developmental Psychology 
Deals with the developmental aspects of basics psychological processes. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 050 or PSYC 052. 

PSYC 119: Cognition 
Information processing, thinking, memory, and language. 
Credits: 
3 

PSYC 120: Psychological Testing 
This lecture/laboratory course consists of the basic concepts in psychological testing and use of psychological tests. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 063 and PSYC 050. PSYC 063. 

PSYC 123: Personality Theory 
 Study of the major theories of personality. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 050. 

PSYC 125: General Social Psychology 
Introduction to the theories and issues of social psychology: individual, interpersonal, and cultural factors in behavior, and the role of perception, attitudes, and motivation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 050. 

PSYC 126: Experimental Social Psychology 
Examination of human social behavior, with emphasis on research methods. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 050. 

PSYC 127: Human Motivation 
Study of the motives generated and maintained in the context of interpersonal relations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 050. 

PSYC 128: Personality Research 
Analysis of the dynamics of personality through empirical research literature. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 050. 

PSYC 140: Practicum in Psychology 
Supervised field placement. Approval of instructor required. 
Credits: 
3 

PSYC 141: Cross-Cultural Psychology 
This course explores culture-related variations in behavior Non-Western research and thought have helped to extend the range of our knowledge in various areas such as culture and cognition, perception, and personality. Acculturation, cross-cultural methods, and measurement problems will be considered. 
Credits: 
3 

PSYC 142: Psychology of Gender 
A survey of gender issues affecting individuals and society. 
Credits: 
3 

PSYC 143: Junior Research 
Individual supervised research. 
Credits: 
3 

PSYC 150: History and Systems 
presents a historical overview and the major theories of psychology. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 050. 

PSYC 154: Senior Seminar 
Treats current topics in psychology. Open to senior majors or minors only. 
Credits: 
3 

PSYC 156: Senior Research 
The student will conduct a research project under the direction of a faculty member. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Senior status. 

PSYC 160: Psychology of Race and Racism 
Intensive inquiry into racial differences in psychological characteristics and the psychological dynamics of racism. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 050. 

PSYC 161: Psychology and the Black Experience 
Examines the experience of blacks in American from the psychological point of view; historical, clinical, and laboratory sources are reviewed. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 050. 

PSYC 170: Computers in Psychological Research 
Applications in the behavioral and social sciences. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 063. 

PSYC 171: Psychopharmacology 
Uses the fundamentals of experimental psychology and pharmacology as building blocks for conventional current approaches to drugs and learning behavior as operant conditioning, drug screening procedures, behavioral toxicology, and behavioral teratology. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor. 

PSYC 174: Intro to Clinical Psychology 
An introduction to the basic concepts and practices of the field of Clinical Psychology. 
Credits: 
3 

PSYC 175: Psychology of Family Issues 
This course introduces students to the systemic models of interaction that shape families. It also uses a developmental model to understand how families evolve over time as well as the critical role of attachment and trauma in shaping individual personalities and life trajectories. 
Credits: 
3 

PSYC 176: Drugs and Human Behavior 
Explores the psychological, pharmacological, and physiological aspects of drugs and human behavior. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PSYC 050. 

PSYC 184/193: Marc. Rec Lecture-Lab (Writing) 
This is a multidisciplinary seminar and laboratory experiences course providing research experience and professional development, responsible conduct of research and related topics to MARC Program Members. Enrollment is limited to MARC Trainees. No course prerequisites; may be repeated for credit. By permission of the instructor only 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
By permission of the instructor only. 

PSYC 716: Abnormal Psychology Writing 
Abnormal Psychology is concerned with identifying, understanding, and treating psychological disorders. The course will explore psychological disorders from a variety of theoretical frameworks including psychological, biological, and sociocultural perspectives. After reviewing historical perspectives, current diagnostic approaches, and classification systems, the course will discuss specific disorders including mood and anxiety disorders, psychotic disorders, substance-related disorders, and eating disorders. In conjunction with discussion of course topics, student will be expected to engage in weekly psychological writing exercises using the appropriate writing guidelines set forth by the American Psychological Association. Course writing activities will also include reflections and a psychological paper focusing on current empirical studies that examine underlying factors as well as on empirically based treatments 
Credits: 
3 

PSYC 723: Personality Writing 
This is an upper level writing intensive course designed to provide students with an introduction to Personality Psychology. It is also designed to enhance students’ professional development with respect to critical thinking, writing, and project management. Throughout the course, students will become acquainted with the art and science of understanding a persons’ personality traits, characteristic adaptations (e.g. movies, goals, values), and narrative identity (i.e. integrative life narratives). The course teaching methods are varied and include the following: experimental learning, selfdirected learning, collaborative learning, distance learning, project based learning, and didactic learning. By the end of the course, students will be able to apply personality core concepts, person centered analyses, and personality assessments to conduct and write up a personality psychobiographical case study within the personological tradition in the field of personality psychology. 
Credits: 
3 

PSYC 741: Cross-Cultural Writing 
This is a writing intensive course that explores culture-related variations in behavior. Non-Western research and thought have helped to extend the range of our knowledge in various areas such as culture and cognition, perception, and personality. Acculturation, cross-cultural methods, and measurement problem will be considered. 
Credits: 
3 

PSYC 991: Psychology Co-op 
Psychology majors find co-op internships in hospitals, school districts, independent research institutes, academic settings, and within Drexel faculty labs 
Credits: 
1 

Sociology 
SOCI 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
 
 
SOCI 001: Introduction to Sociology 
Basic concepts in sociology including the nature and functioning of groups, the individual and the group, social processes, and social change. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 003: Social Problems 
An analysis of major institutional problem areas in American society, with particular focus on the interplay between structural and sociopsychological level factors. Attention is also given to social policies designed to ameliorate problematic situations. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 020: Introduction to Social Psychology 
Analyzes the development of human nature and personality as products of social interaction and culture. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 070: Introduction to Criminology 
Covers the nature and extent of crime and proposes policies for the treatment of crime and criminals. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 071: Juvenile Delinquency 
Discusses the nature and extent of delinquency, community and personality factors in delinquent behavior, theories and methods of treatment and preventive measures. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 072: Juvenile Justice System 
An examination of the historical development and contemporary forms of treatment of juvenile offenders, with special emphasis on the functioning of these approaches in American society. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 074: Corrections 
An analysis of correctional approaches and strategies as well as an evaluation of their effectiveness relative to theories of penology. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 079: Internship 
Integration of fieldwork in criminal justice agencies with criminological theory. (NOTE: by permission only) 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 100: Social Theory and Society 
Presents social theories before the nineteenth century and the subsequent development of sociology. Applies various theories to society today, connecting theory with practice and social policy. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 101: History of Social Thought 
Examines the thoughts of pre-Socratic thinkers to Renaissance thinkers. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 102: Directed Readings in Honors for Sophomores 
 Includes readings, reports, and discussions around selected topics in sociology. 
Credits: 
1 

SOCI 103: Directed Readings in Honors for Sophomores 
 Continuation of SOCI 102. 
Credits: 
1 

SOCI 104: Directed Readings in Honors for Juniors 
 Consists of readings, reports, and discussions of classical works in the field and of contemporary journal literature. 
Credits: 
1 

SOCI 105: Directed Readings in Honors for Juniors 
 Consists of readings, reports, and discussions of classical works in the field and of contemporary journal literature. 
Credits: 
1 

SOCI 106: Senior Departmental Honors 
Independent investigation of a topic of interest to the qualified senior student under the supervision of a staff member. Results are presented as an honors thesis which must be defended in an oral examination. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 108: Senior Review 
Review and analysis of sociological topics, concepts, theories and issues through focused discussions and written assignments. Major objective is to integrate materials of the major. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 110: Elementary Statistics 
Focuses on statistical methods applied to social data, employing measures of central tendency, dispersion, bivariate tests for significant differences and association, and simple regression. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 111: Sociological Methods 
Basic methods and techniques employed in sociological research. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 119: Advanced Statistics I 
Focuses on the application of multivariate statistical methods to social data, employing two measures: linear regression and analysis of variance. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SOCI 110. 

SOCI 121: Collective Behavior 
Explores mobs, panics, mass behavior, public opinion, propaganda, social movements, revolutions and reform as incipient changes in the social order. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 125: Global Health: Challenges, Responses, and Future Actions 
This course presents an overview of global health issues through examination of major determinants of health and key areas of disease burden. Students will be introduced to the complex tapestry of social, economic, political, and environmental factors that affect the health of populations globally 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 130: Principles of Demography 
Overview of demographic variables, with emphasis on fertility, morbidity, migration, and urbanization and the relationships between population growth and other social and economic factors. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 131: Introduction to Human Ecology 
Focuses on the interrelationships between population, resources, and environment; the implications for population growth; natural and human resources utilization; and environmental concern. Approach adapted from demography and human ecology. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 132: Population 
Deals with the volume, composition, quality, growth, trends, and distribution of population, along with the relationship of populations to social organization. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 133: Women in Development 
Discusses critical theoretical research issues, associated with international development, focusing on the position of women in various cultural contexts. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 139: Independent Study 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 140: Urban Sociology 
Examines the urban community, its patterns, and its institutions, and includes supervised projects in urban research materials and techniques. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 144: Climate Change, Energy, and Social Justice 
This course covers a broad spectrum of human impacts on the earth, including how people make decisions about their interactions with the environment. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 150: Social Stratification 
Examination of the causes and social, economic, and psychological effects of differentials in rank and status in society. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 151: Sociology of Poverty 
Examines the underlying causes and the social, psychological, and political consequences of poverty; the socioeconomic characteristics and family life of the poor; and the community services and programs designed to alleviate poverty. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 155: Sociology of Power 
Analyzes power in the contemporary content, then in general perspective, with special emphasis on its role in social change. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 160: The Sociology of Afro Americans (formerly Negro in America) 
Examines blacks as a minority group in American society. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 161: Problems in the Black Community 
Study of the social structure of the black community and social movements directed towards social change. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 165: Intergroup Relations 
Comparative survey of majority-minority relations, determining factors, consequences for groups and individuals, and strategies for altering. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SOCI 020. 

SOCI 170: Principles of Criminal Justice 
Analyzes the various segments of the criminal justice system, including the means by which these segments depend upon each other for their perpetuation, and compares the theoretical purposes of the criminal justice system and its present-day practices. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 172: Social Change and the Criminal Justice System 
An analysis of the impact of social, economic, and political change on the structure and function of key criminal justice agencies. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SOCI 070 or SOCI 170. 

SOCI 173: Deviance and the Community 
Study of the types of individual and institutional forms of deviance, with an assessment of theoretical approaches to it. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 174: Police, Law, and Society 
Examination of the role of the police and their use and misuse of law, with attention to society’s role in controlling and approving police practices, along with the part society plays in encouraging and approving police malpractice. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 175: Sociology of Law 
Examination of law as a form of social control; analysis of relationships between law and society. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 180: The Family 
Explores the family as a social institution, the relation of the family to the community, family organization and disorganization, and the family and personality development. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 183: Introduction to Medical Sociology 
Overview of the development of social medicine and the sociology of medicine, examining major areas of activity in medical sociology. Distinction is made between sociology of medicine and sociology in medicine, with concentration on the former. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 184: Seminar: Sociology of Mental Health 
Deals with sociological theories and the etiology of mental disorder; research on social epidemiology and ecology; the impact of social structure; popular conceptions of mental health and deviance; and emerging ideologies of mental disciplines. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 186: Death and Dying 
Reviews research and theory relating to attitudes and behavior relating to death and dying. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 188: Family Life Laboratory I 
Provides analysis of dramatic techniques, including imagery exercise and spontaneous role playing. Explores life history method for understanding problems of family life. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 189: Sociology of Work 
Focuses on social aspects of the organization of work in industrial society; relations between cultural and industrial organization, and interrelationships among industrial, political, familial, and educational institutions. 
Credits: 
3 

SOCI 199: Environmental Inequality 
This course systematically studies how the intersections of race, class, geography, public policy, and movements affect environmental outcomes. In addition to examining how climate change, declines in ecosystems services, and pollution, among other environmental ills, are inequitably distributed in the United States and around the world. we also examine solutions 
Credits: 
3 

Theatre Arts 
http://coas.howard.edu/theatrearts/ 
The Department of Theatre Arts is committed to the training of knowledgeable theatre artists, theorists, historians, and teachers in the theatre arts. The Department is dedicated to the principle of developing the highest quality of theatre art, and to the serious investigation and perpetuation of the experiences and aesthetics of Black theatre. 
Objectives 
1. 
To train and educate theatre artist-scholars by providing students with a broad-based foundation of theatre process and practice. 

2. 
To provide students with diverse theatre experiences and to investigate and perpetuate the aesthetics of African-American theatre. 

3. 
To provide students with a knowledge of and appreciation for related Fine and Performing Arts disciplines and how they are integrated into the practice of theatre. 

4. 
To provide students with the basic techniques necessary for performance in theatre, film and television. 


The curriculum for each area of concentration is administered by an Area Coordinator who is appointed by the Chairman of the Department. Students enrolled in a Theatre Arts program shall be advised by the appropriate Area Coordinator. 
All Theatre Arts students must officially declare an area of concentration and successfully complete an audition and/or interview in that area. Official declaration can only be made by filing a completed Area of Concentration Declaration Form with the appropriate area coordinator and conducting a final interview with the Departmental Chairman. All Theatre Arts students must pass the English and Mathematics Placement examination. Otherwise, the student must successfully complete the required remedial courses. 
Majors 
The Department of Theatre Arts offers several major areas of concentrated study which lead to the Bachelor of Fine Arts degree in Theatre Arts. Areas of concentration in Theatre Arts include the Performing Arts: Acting, Musical Theatre, and Dance; Theatre Arts Administration and Theatre Technology. 
 
Minors 
Minors in Theatre Arts, Dance Arts, Theatre Arts Administration, Technical Theatre, and Playwriting are also available to non-Theatre Arts students. 
 
Admissions 
All Applications require department review. Prospective students are not automatically accepted by the Department of Theatre Arts once they declare Theatre Arts as their area of interest. After review of pertinent data, the Department makes the final determination about admissions to its programs. 
 
General Requirements 
All theatre arts students must satisfy the general requirements for admission to the University.Once accepted to the University, students interested in performance programs of study (Acting,Musical Theatre, Dance) will prepare for auditions and students interested in administration and technical areas (Theatre Arts Administration, Theatre Technology) will prepare for interviews. 
All transfer students must meet the requirements outlined on the College of Arts and Sciences’ website:  http://www.coas.howard.edu./requirements.html#tc. In addition, all transfer students must successfully complete an audition/ interview in the area of concentration in which they are intending to enter, before being accepted in the Department of Theatre Arts.  This process must occur before arriving on campus.  At that time level placement usually occurs and that will determine which courses will be accepted in the discipline.  General education courses may also require that equivalences be verified by the appropriate Department on campus.  All transfer students are advised that transferring into the Department of Theatre Arts does not excuse the taking of prescribed sequential courses necessary for successful completion of the area of concentration.  Furthermore, transferring into the Department may require additional time and resources to complete the chosen area of concentration. 
Guidelines for Exchange Students 
1. 
The student must have a 2.75 grade point average or better and be in good standing in the department. 

2. 
Student must have a grade of "C" or better in all courses required for his/her area of concentration. 

3. 
The student must submit a letter to the Chairman requesting an exchange program of study along with official descriptions of the courses from the catalogue that will be taken at the exchange school. This information will be forwarded to the appropriate coordinator, then presented to the Faculty who will make the final determination on the request. 

4. 
The student must also file the appropriate forms in the Office of International Student Services. This includes submitting a transcript and an interview with appropriate authorities. 


 
THEATRE ARTS DEGREE PROGRAMS 
 
Acting 
The objectives of the Acting concentration are designed to provide the student the opportunity to master the acting skills necessary for pursuit of a professional career in the areas of performing arts. The program combines classroom instruction with rehearsal and performance techniques. The program is divided into three levels of training: Elementary, Intermediate and Advanced. Specific skills are emphasized at each level. A jury examination is required each semester of all acting students. A satisfactory jury examination is necessary for a passing grade in all Acting classes. 
 
Musical Theatre 
The purpose of the Musical Theatre Performance concentration is to produce professional artist/scholars with the ability to excel on any theatrical stage, including but not limited to, Broadway, Off-Broadway, touring, regional, international, cabaret and concert (both major and minor), commercial and not-for-profit. The program asserts that beginning with intense self-discovery and exploration, matched with dedicated focus on foundational technique, followed by an unyielding diligence towards artistic and scholarly excellence, performers become creative, high-quality artists. The program works to facilitate not just the creation of performers who are highly skilled technicians of singing, dancing, and acting but passionate artists with a deep respect for the craft, who use musical theatre to communicate with audiences about our shared human condition. 
 
Dance 
The Dance program is designed to educate, train, and develop talented students in the performance skills of dance. The program combines theoretical classroom instruction, studio techniques and rehearsal, and performance skills. The student is provided with the opportunity of technical development with guest artists, internships with major performance companies, and critical guidance in level placement and training. Entry requirements for dance students include auditions and interviews and exit requirements involve passing a jury examination. A major emphasis in this program is the successful completion of the practicum experience in the senior year. 
 
Theatre Arts Administration 
The Theatre Arts Administration program is intended for students who express an interest in and an inclination toward the production and managerial aspects of theatre. The program is based on the philosophy that a successful career in Theatre Arts Administration requires knowledge of modern business practices coupled with a comprehensive background in theatre. The focus of this area of concentration is directed toward the study of both theatre arts core courses, as well as courses in business, which relate to the disciplines of Management, Legal Environments, Marketing, and Finance. In addition, the premise of the Theatre Arts Administration program is to impart to the student the three characteristics that embody a successful arts organization: artistic quality, public service, and fiscal responsibility. A major emphasis in this program is the preparation for the successful completion of an appropriate internship. 
 
Theatre Technology 
The Theatre Technology program is designed to educate, train and inspire talented students in the technology of live theatre. It is expected that students who successfully complete this course of study will eventually become accomplished technical directors and theatre technicians in community, educational, regional and/or professional theatres as well as accomplished planners or consultants in other semi-related occupational fields. 
 
 
THAC 130: Rehearsal & Performance/Lab 
This lecture/laboratory course provides a platform to experiment with rehearsal techniques, while providing a platform to experience a professional rehearsal room setting and engage professional rehearsal room best practices in the creation of a live performance. MAJORS ONLY. Prerequisites: THAC THAC 021, 022, 023, 024, 120, 121, 106 
Credits: 
6 

THDN 054: Dance Fundamentals II 
An intermediate study and practicum of the basic concepts of dance and dance principles within ballet, contemporary, and jazz dance movements. Prerequisite: THDN 053 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 056: Dance Fundamentals IV 
Continuation of THDN 055 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 066: Tap II 
This practicum course offers progressive development to the historic origins and foundations of tap dance to the intermediate and advance levels. The focus of the course will be on terminology, technique, and placement for maximum results in execution. Students will also explore style, rhythm, and musicality specific to tap dancing. Prerequisite: THDN 065 
Credits: 
2 

THFD 186: Honors Directed Studies 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
3 

THFD 203: Shakespeare/Actors 
This is an advanced study of the canon of William Shakespeare for actors 
Credits: 
3 

THMT 028: Character/Scene Study III - MT Majors 
In this course the student will dig deeper into understanding the "mindset" of their character and how to use the clues in a script to develop their character. 
Credits: 
3 

THMT 029: Acting Character Scene Study IV - MT Majors 
Continuation of THMT 028 
Credits: 
3 

THMT 044: Musical Theatre Standards 
Credits: 
2 

THMT 068: Jazz II 
A continuation of THMT 067. 
Credits: 
2 

THMT 301: Piano for Musical Theatre I 
The purpose of this lecture/practicum course is to provide the aspiring musical theatre performer and/ or music theater singing teacher with effective knowledge of the piano to assist your music theory understanding, music notation reading, and ear training ability 
Credits: 
1 

THMT 302: Piano for Musical Theatre II 
This practicum course builds on the principles learned in THMT 301, incorporating the exploration of scales and vocalized warm up patterns. 
Credits: 
1 

THTT 103: Hand Drafting 
This lecture/practicum course introduces students to the fundamentals of hand drafting for theatre focusing on the techniques of preparation of design and technical drawings for theatrical production including line weights, plate organization, ground plans, elevations, detail drawings, working drawings, light and sound plots. Design/Tech/Management majors only 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 104: Computer Aided Drafting 
This lecture/practicum course introduces students to Computer Aided Drafting and Design techniques emphasizing designing with AutoCAD and/or Vector works with a focus on the creation of virtual models. Design/Tech/Management majors only. PreReq: THTT 103 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 106: Drawing & Painting Skills 
This studio course introduces the notion of eye to brain to hand coordination as fundamental to the drawing processes. The course will focus on drawing in a precise manner as detail of subject should be achieved while working expressively. Emphasis is placed on proportion and scale, linear atmospheric perspective, multiple vanishing points, relative size, contrast, tonal study and surface texture. Required for Design/Tech/Management majors 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 301: Design Tech Practicum I 
Each semester a junior Design & Technology BFA candidate is required to enroll in an appropriate section of Practicum and is assigned specific design or shop work in the mounting of departmental productions. Design/Tech/Management majors only 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 302: Design/Tech Practicum II 
Continuation of THTT 301 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 303: Design Studio I 
This course focuses on student's collaborative and artistic abilities in theatre practice with an emphasis on beginning costume, scenery, lighting or sound design. Students participate in a range of visual, written, and verbal techniques of communication; script analysis, style, research techniques, and rendering skills, based on several theatrical pieces. Students work in small select groups to establish broader conceptual ideas, and individually focus on design elements of the designated theatrical piece. This allows each student to learn theatre design methodology developing a creative voice in collaboration with others. Pre-Req: THTT201 and 202 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 304: Design Studio II 
Continuation of THTT 303 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 305: Period Styles I 
This is a seminar styled class intensively exploring periods throughout history from pre-Egyptian through the 20th century by studying architecture, interior decor and furniture as they relate to the performing arts. Design/Tech/Management majors only 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 306: Period Styles II 
Continuation of THTT 305 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 313: Portfolio 
Students will learn to select, categorize and document their achievements and accomplishments for review and assessment related to academic placement and/or employment. Design/Tech/Management majors only. 
Credits: 
2 

THTT 314: Business Show: Theatre Design & Stage Management 
This course serves to cover the workings of professional designers and stage managers including topics in union membership, contract negotiation, contract execution, website creation, touring and the like. Design/Tech/Management majors only 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 401: Design/Tech Practicum III 
Each semester a senior Design & Technology BFA candidate is required to enroll in an appropriate section of Practicum and is assigned specific design or shop work in the mounting of departmental productions. Design/Tech majors only. 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 402: Design/Tech Practicum IV 
Continuation of THTT 401 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 403: Design Studio III 
Continuation of THTT 304 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 404: Design Studio IV 
Continuation of THTT 403 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 406: Electronic Visualization 
This lecture/practicum course focuses on computer rendering and its relationship to three-dimensional design and the entertainment industry utilizing CADD systems. Students will learn and practice rendering techniques and drafting that support theatrical design 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 409: Design/Tech/Management Internship 
This course is designed as an off-campus experience opportunity to work with selected organizations in theatre or related areas as agreed upon by the student and supervising Academic advisor. 
Credits: 
3 

Theatre Arts Administration 
THTA 
THSV 10: Intro to Theater 
Theatre from the world of the ancient Greeks to the present day. Students gain an appreciation of the aesthetics and humanistic aspects of Theatre. 
Credits: 
3 

THTA 001: Theatre Arts Administration Lab 
Credits: 
1 

THTA 001, 002, 003, 004, 005: Theatre Arts Admin Labs I - V 
This course expands the student’s understanding of Theatre Arts Administration y applying their knowledge to real cases or situations that are carefully supervised by the instructor. 
Credits: 
5 

THTA 002: Theatre Arts Administration Lab II 
Continuation of THTA 001 
Credits: 
1 

THTA 003: Theatre Arts Administration Lab III 
Continuation of THTA 002 
Credits: 
1 

THTA 004: Theatre Arts Administration Lab IV 
Continuation of THTA 003 
Credits: 
1 

THTA 005: Theatre Arts Administration V 
Continuation of THTA 004 
Credits: 
2 

THTA 084: Production Management 
Credits: 
3 

THTA 089: Aesthetics 
An introduction to aesthetics; a variety of theories of fine arts; an evaluation and review of dramatic aesthetic analysis and judgment. Analysis of the nature and role of the creative process in the human experience. 
Credits: 
3 

THTA 090: Introduction to Theatre Management I 
This course is designed to provide an introduction to the economic and managerial aspects of American theatre, especially as they apply to repertory, community, and educational organizations. The course aims to relate principles of business management to the theatre, to evaluate theatre management to date and to suggest new directions for the future. Emphasis will be placed on the practical and contemporary aspects of the field. Classroom work will be supplemented by administrative assignments related to the Department’s stage productions. Fall semester only. 
Credits: 
3 

THTA 091: Introduction to Theatre Management II 
Continuation of THTA 090. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THTA 090 

THTA 092: Intermediate Theatre Administration Lec/Lab 
Fundamentals of box office operations; theatre facilities management and operations; public relations for the theatre including advertising, publicity and audience development, with supervised lab including production responsibilities in each of three areas of study. 
Credits: 
3 

THTA 093: Intermediate Theatre Administration Lab 
Continuation of THTA 092. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
THTA 092 

THTA 094: Production Management 
Credits: 
3 

THTA 95: Intro to Production/Lab 
Students will have learned the process of mounting a theatrical production from conception to curtain call 
Credits: 
3 

THTA 156: Stage Management 
To explore the methods and principles used to organize and supervise the performance personnel and production crews from the pre-audition period through the post-production meetings; to develop an understanding of all the responsibilities of an efficient stage manager and how to best satisfy the needs of all the production personnel. 
Credits: 
3 

THTA 190: Seminar in Theatre Administration 
Teaches problem solving with regard to the development of the professional and community theatre. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Juniors and Seniors only. 

THTA 191: Fundraising for the Arts 
This course will provide practical information on various aspects of fundraising, particularly for non- profit organizations. Attention will be focused on numerous tools and strategies of fundraising. Emphasis on methods that help non-profits throughout their journey of development, programming and upkeep will be explored. 
Credits: 
3 

THTA 207: Leading in a Changing Society 
Learn to lead change in your institution, within your community, and nationally. The Leading Change Course covers how to assess the need for change, develop a plan for change, and provide successful change leadership. 
Credits: 
3 

THTA 208: Finance Management 
This course is for students interested in gaining an awareness of foundational finance management for non-business majors. A big portion of this course will engage written learning. A certain amount of memorizing what certain relationships with terms, steps, and concepts have with one another is requisite for this course. 
Credits: 
3 

THTA 209: Drama Internship 
An intensive career-oriented work experience related to the student’s academic studies, professional and education in Theatre Administration 
Credits: 
3 

THTA 211: Arts & Innovation 
This course will explore both how leaders are innovating in the arts to meet changing and often times fleeting appetites of their patrons and the broader public 
Credits: 
3 

THTA 212: Human Resources Management 
The Human Resource Management (HRM) fundamentals class will give students a broad introductory understanding of the human resources function and the role it plays in organizations with a particular emphasis on arts based fields. 
Credits: 
3 

Theatre Education 
THEA 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
THEA 170: Methods and Principles of Teaching Drama 
Methodology and principles of teaching dramatic arts on the secondary level; a prerequisite for practice teaching. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor. Juniors only. Course is restricted to Drama majors. 

THEA 171, 172: Independent Study. Directed Studies in Theatre Education 
Designed by the teacher and student to pursue a particular area of interest in theatre education. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior or senior standing and consent of instructor. 

Theatre Foundation 
THFD 
THFD 010: Introduction to Theatre 
Study of the theatre in terms of its critical, historical aesthetic, and practical aspects, focusing on the relationship between theatre and society in various periods. 
Credits: 
3 

THFD 040: Playwriting I 
Involves the development of the play script from premise to scene, teaching basic craftsmanship in developing characters, plot, and dialogue. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 002, ENGL 003, THFD 080, THFD 083. 

THFD 041: Playwriting II 
Traces the development of the play script from a scene to a one-act play. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THFD 040 and consent of instructor. 

THFD 042: Playwriting III 
An advanced course in play/script preparation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THFD 040, THFD 041 and consent of instructor. 

THFD 043: Playwriting IV 
A continuation of Playwriting III. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THFD 040, THFD 041, THFD 042 and consent of instructor. 

THFD 070: Children’s Theatre: History and Philosophy 
Study of the historical and philosophical development of the children’s theatre movement in America and Europe. 
Credits: 
3 

THFD 080: Play Analysis 
Critical analysis of dramatic literature with regard to plot, theme, and character, approached from the director’s and actor’s viewpoints. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 002, ENGL 003. 

THFD 081: Play Reading 
Continuation of Play Analysis. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THFD 080 and consent of instructor. 

THFD 083: Introduction To Playwriting 
Course is designed to expose students to dramatic structure of representative genres and utilize those skills gained in the reading and analysis of selected dramatic literature. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THFD 080. 

THFD 180: Theatre History I 
Examines the major movements, trends and styles in theatre and dram from antiquity through late 18th century. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THFD 080, THFD 083. 

THFD 181: Theatre History II 
Examines the major movements, trends and styles in theatre and drama from 18th century through early 20th century. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THFD 180. 

THFD 183: Contemporary Trends and Issues in American Theatre 
Examines issues and trends in American theatre from the mid 1960’s to the present. Includes the study of development of Regional Theatre, Off-off Broadway, Black American Theatre, the “Happening,” Environmental Theatre and Theatre in American Colleges and Universities. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THFD 181, or consent of instructor. 

THFD 185: Development of Black American Theatre and Drama: 19th Century to Present 
Survey course in the development of Black American theatre and drama from 19th century to present. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor. 

THFD 187: Honors Thesis 
Support of the conceptualization, development, and writing of a thesis or capstone project by a faculty member. 
Credits: 
3 

THFD 188: Seminar in Dramatic Criticism 
An advanced program of study in dramatic criticism. Student expected to complete an advance project. 
Credits: 
3 

Theatre Technology 
THTT 
THTT 001: Theatre Practicum I: Rehearsal and Performance 
Supervised laboratory experience in technical theatre, construction techniques, scenery, costumes, lighting, and props; production mounting and performance. 
Credits: 
1 

THTT 002, 003, 004, 005, 006, 007: Theatre Practicum II-VII 
Continuation of THTT 001. 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
THAC 001. 

THTT 008: Theatre Practicum: House Management 
Supervised laboratory experience in theatre administration, publicity and house management. 
Credits: 
1 

THTT 009: Advance Practicum IX 
Advanced section of Practicum for Stage Managers, Assistant Directors, Crew Heads, etc. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor. 

THTT 050: Introduction to Technical Theatre 
The fundamentals of methods, vocabulary, materials and facilities employed in technical theatre. 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 051: Basic Stage Lighting 
A beginning course in the principles and practices of stage lighting, with emphasis on the equipment and procedures used in typical theatre facilities and productions. 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 052: Basic Stagecraft 
An introduction to the materials, techniques, and equipment used in the construction, handling, and maintenance of scenery and properties for the stage; and to acquaint students with the art of scene design. 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 053: Costume for the Theatre 
Teaches fundamental techniques and theories of designing and executing stage costumes, with period research, color, and fabrics studied in relation to the actor, director, and designer. 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 057: Stage Make-up/Lab 
Introduction to the fundamental aspects of theatrical make-up, hair design, and the construction and use of prosthetics. 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 058: Tech Production I 
A supervised laboratory course in the practice of stagecraft, stage lighting, stage sound, state properties, stage costuming, stage make-up and special effects with emphasis on the equipment and procedures used in typical theatre facilities and productions. 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 059: Tech Production II 
Continuation of Tech I. 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 148: Playwriting Seminar I 
An advanced program of study in playwriting. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor. 

THTT 149: Playwriting Seminar II 
Continuation of Playwriting Seminar I. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THTT 148 and consent of instructor. 

THTT 150: Sound for the Theatre 
An extensive course in the theory, equipment, and techniques used to achieve both live and recorded sound for the stage. The course will include experimentation with contemporary concepts and materials. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THTT 050 and consent of instructor. 

THTT 151: Intermediate Stage Lighting 
Emphasizes the design process, and includes the mechanical and conceptual elements of both the lighting plot and the realized product. Basic drafting skills are required. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THTT 051 and consent of instructor. 

THTT 152: Intermediate Stagecraft 
A continuing course in the principles and practices of stagecraft which emphasizes the more specialized areas of stagecraft and stage properties. The course also include the techniques for working with new or seldom used materials. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THTT 052 and consent of instructor. 

THTT 153: Intermediate Costume for the Theatre 
Advanced course in teaching fundamental techniques and theories of designing and executing stage costumes, with period research, color, and fabrics studied in relation to the actor, director, and designer. 
Credits: 
3 

THTT 154: Design I 
Introduction to drafting procedures and graphic techniques for the stage. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THTT 051, 482-002 and consent of instructor. 

THTT 155: Design II 
The study of styles, principles, and mechanics of scenic design. Projects will include color sketches, scale drawings, and scale models. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THTT 154 and consent of instructor. 

THTT 156: Independent Study: Stage Management 
To explore the methods and principles used to organize and supervise the performance personnel and production crews from the pre-audition period through the post-production meetings; to develop an understanding of all the responsibilities of an efficient stage manager and how to best satisfy the needs of all the production personnel. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THTT 030 and consent of instructor. 

THTT 157: Special Projects in Technical Theatre 
An in depth exploration of advanced and special areas of technical theatre. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THTT 051, THT 052 and consent of instructor. 

THTT 159: Seminar in Technical Theatre 
An advanced program of study in technical theatre practice including: design, props, costuming, stage management, and technical theatre research. Students will be expected to complete an advanced project. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THTT 151, or THTT 152, or THTT 153 and consent of instructor. 

THTT 209: Drama Internship 
An intensive career-oriented work experience related to the student’s academic studies, professional and education in Theatre Technology 
Credits: 
3 

Acting 
THAC 
ARCHIVE - THAC 209: Drama Internship: Acting 
This course is designed to provide an on-site internship experience for senior level actors at area theatres such as the Folger and Arena Stage. 
Credits: 
3 

THAC 001: Performance Practicum 
This practicum course gives course credit for preparation and performance in live stage productions. Program area advisors must approve performance practicum course content. This course is meant for the training of the professional actor.MAJORS ONLY 
Credits: 
1 

THAC 004: Theatre Practicum IV 
A course in which the primary goal is to enhance the student’s previously acquired knowledge and abilities by applying them to real cases or situations that are carefully supervised by the instructor. Prerequisite. THAC 003. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
THAC 003. 

THAC 014: Voice for the Stage 
Development of the vocal techniques for the actor. 
Credits: 
3 

THAC 015: Diction for the Stage 
Introduction to phonetics and placement of sounds for effective speech. 
Credits: 
3 

THAC 016: Phonetics/Dialects 
Analysis of techniques of various dialects based on phonetics and phonology. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THAC 014. 

THAC 017: Speech for the Microphone 
The objective of this course is to emphasize the importance of effective vocal techniques for state, film and TV production and to aid the student in formulating a practical, systematic approach to more effectively communicate ideas using microphones. Spring only. 
Credits: 
3 

THAC 020: Introduction to Acting: For Non-Majors 
An introduction for non-majors to the problems and techniques of acting through history, theory, and practice. Appreciation of the actor’s function as a creative artist through selected readings, exercises and play attendance. Examination of the actor’s craft through improvisation and exercises, physical and emotional skills. Each section limited to sixteen (16) students. 
Credits: 
3 

THAC 021: Acting: Techniques I 
Development of the acting instrument and the processes and techniques of the actor. Improvisations and beginning scenes: textual analysis to perceive acting problems, personal involvement, selecting and accomplishing stage tasks. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor based on audition. Fall semester only. 

THAC 022: Acting: Techniques II 
Practical exploration of the actor’s craft through improvisation and exercises in physical and psychological action; problems in the use of imagination, observation and research as tools for exploring the script. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THAC 021. Spring Semester only. 

THAC 023: Acting Character Scene Study I 
Development of acting skills and sensory awareness. Beginning scene study, textual analysis. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THAC 022. Fall semester only. 

THAC 024: Acting Character Scene Study II 
This seminar/practicum course focuses on the analysis, interpretation and performance of contemporary modern dramatic literature, with a special provision for dramatic literature of the African diaspora. This course is meant for the training of the professional actor. Prerequisite: THAC 014, 021, 022, 023; 024; 120; THFD 080. 081 MAJORS ONLY 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THAC 023. Spring Semester only. 

THAC 025: Movement for the Stage 
Development of body usage and awareness, spatial improvisation, basic movement or skills and warm-up techniques. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor. Fall Semester only. 

THAC 026: Stage Combat 
Fundamentally a movement course. Introduces fencing, and incorporates the three major weapons: the epee, the sabre, and the foil. Also emphasizes unarmed combat techniques, involving movement patterns in boxing, karate and wrestling and the application of these activities toward creating the illusion of combative reality on the stage. Spring Semester only. 
Credits: 
2 

THAC 027: Audition Techniques 
Preparation of monologues, work on prepared and cold readings, resume, and marketing techniques. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor. Class is limited to fifteen (15) students. 

THAC 030: Beginning Directing 
Presents the fundamentals of script analysis, blocking casting procedures, compositions, and stage business and their relationship to technical theatre. 
Credits: 
3 

THAC 054: Fund. of Dance II 
Fundamentals II goes beyond the basics to tackle more complex and challenging floor work, as well as to emphasize performance qualities and expression. 
Credits: 
2 

THAC 071: Creativity: Theatre and Life 
Using the theories of Viola Spolin, Daniel Pink, Rollo May, Edward de Bono, Eric Maisel and Michael Michalko, Creativity in Drama and Life is designed to enhance the students ability to understand and utilize their creative abilities. This course will aid in freeing the student to explore their mind, voice and body in an original and deeply creative manner. Each student will be challenged to become aware of processes that aid them in ridding themselves of mental and physical tension, improve their focusing skills, and to take bold and spontaneous risks (both written and improvised). In addition, this course is geared towards making the student aware of the application of the creative process to fields beyond theatre. This class will also engage the student through using the principles of teamwork and leadership to involve them in honest and conscientious self and peer assessment, and, to expose the student to techniques of creative application in order to drastically improve their creativity and ability to communicate that creativity through communication and interaction with others. 
Credits: 
3 

THAC 106: Acting for Television & Film 
A study of the special technical aspects of acting before a camera. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor. This course requirement may be substituted by THAC 211. 

THAC 107: Forms of Entertainment 
Designed to familiarize the student with various selected forms of entertainment, from both a scholarly and practical perspective. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor. 

THAC 108: Introduction to Dinner Theater 
Teaches the techniques of producing and directing a dinner theatre. 
Credits: 
3 

THAC 110: Dramatic Interpretation 
Introduces the student to the analysis and interpretation of various type of literature. During the course of study, the student will become acquainted with the techniques of poetry, narrative, cold readings and reader’s theatre. 
Credits: 
3 

THAC 120: Acting: Character Study 
Exploration of the characterization, text analysis and the synthesis of voice, speech and movement as well as appreciation of choices and obligation in the development of the characters. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THAC 023, THAC 024. Fall semester only. 

THAC 121: Acting Character Scene Study IV/Lab 
Continuation of Character Study (THAC 120) with special emphasis on character work and performance techniques. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THAC 120. Spring semester only. 

THAC 122: Acting: Styles I 
Extension of focus upon acting of techniques and scene study and problems of form and content in poetic drama. Material of heightened prose will also be explored in terms of speech and action. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THAC 121. Fall semester only. 

THAC 123: Acting: Styles II 
Exploration of selected styles of acting from an historical perspective. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THAC 025 and THAC 122. 

THAC 128: Seminar in Acting 
Continuation of work in styles leading to performance in full stage production. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THAC 122. Course restricted to graduating seniors in Performing Arts only. Spring semester only. 

THAC 200: Theatre Workshop 
A series of master classes in theatre conducted by guest artists-in-residence. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
Admission by consent of chairman and faculty only. 

THAC 201-208: Independent Study for Each Area of Concentration 
Designed by the teacher and student to pursue a particular area of interest in theatre. This is an elective course and cannot be substituted for a required course. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor. 

THAC 209: Drama Internship 
Credits: 
3 

THAC 209-01: Drama Internship 
This course is designed to provide an on-site experience and an introduction to the economic and administrative aspects of American theatre, especially as they apply to repertory, community and educational organizations. 
Credits: 
3 

THAC 211: Acting for Film and TV (I) 
This course generally taught by a guest artist, is for juniors and seniors only. A professional course which provides hands on experience in acting techniques for the camera. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor. 

THAC 212: Acting for Film and TV (II) 
A continuation of THAC 211. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor. 

Dance Arts 
THDN 
THDN 001: Modern Dance Technique I 
Beginning fundamentals of modern dance in the Katherine Dunham and/or Martha Graham technique. Fall semester. 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 002: Modern Dance Technique II 
Beginning- intermediate modern technique in Dunham and/or Graham for dance majors. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
THDN 001, or consent of instructor. Spring semester. 

THDN 003: Modern Dance Technique III 
Intermediate modern technique in Dunham and/or Graham for dance majors. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
THDN 002, or consent of instructor. Fall semester. 

THDN 004: Modern Dance Technique IV 
Intermediate-advanced levels of modern technique in Dunham and/or Graham for dance majors. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
THDN 003, and or consent of instructor. Spring semester. 

THDN 007: Ballet I (Dance Mjrs) 
Emphasizes ballet discipline, develops posture, alignment, and muscular control to improve health and appearance of physical body. 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 007: Ballet I (Dance Mjrs) 
Emphasizes ballet discipline, develops posture, alignment, and muscular control to improve health and appearance of physical body. 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 008: Ballet II 
Development of specific approach to classical form of ballet (Cechetti, English, Bourneville, etc.) 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
THDN 007, or consent of instructor. Spring semester. 

THDN 009: Ballet III 
Intermediate level of specific techniques in classical ballet (Cechetti, English, Bourneville, etc.). 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
THDN 008, or consent of instructor. Fall semester. 

THDN 010: Ballet IV 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 015: African Dance I 
Emphasis on a specific region (Ghana, Senegal, Guinea, Gambia, Ivory Coast, etc.) of traditional African dance movements, history and music. Spring semester. 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 015: African Dance I Majors 
Explores traditional movements and rhythms from Central and West Africa and is accompanied by live drumming. Focuses on the development of solid foundational skills in African dance technique. Emphasizes the cultural significance of various dances and rhythms as well as the influences of the African aesthetic in contemporary dance and culture. 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 016: African Dance II 
Examination and practice of traditional African dance movements, history and music from a specific region (Cameroon, Gabon, Rwanda, Congo, Zaire, etc.) 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
THDN 015, or consent of instructor. Fall semester. 

THDN 017: African Dance III 
Continuation of THDN 016 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 021: Dance Composition I 
Theoretical and practical application of compositional skills in dance; movement themes and variations, motifs, etc., choreographer’s role in the structuring of dance works. Fall semester. 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 022: Dance Composition II 
Continuation of Dance Composition I and application of improvisation as a choreographic tool in the creative process of compositional development. 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 023: Dance Composition III 
Continuation of THDN 022 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 024: Dance Composition IV 
Continuation of THDN 023 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 029: Dance History I 
Dance is the oldest form of human expression. Dance History I, the first course in a two-course series, is an intensive reading and writing theoretical course that examines the history of dance in Africa from antiquity to the 20th century. 
Credits: 
3 

THDN 030: Dance History II 
Continuation of THDN 029 
Credits: 
3 

THDN 031: Anatomy & Kinesiology 
This lecture course is an introduction to the principles of Anatomy and Kinesiology and its relationship towards optimal movement in advance to elite level dance technique with a heightened focus in Ballet and Ballet Pedagogy. Emphasis is placed on the structure and function of the muscular and skeletal systems. Movement analysis, conditioning principles, proper alignment, terminology, and injury prevention will be discussed throughout the class duration 
Credits: 
3 

THDN 036: Dance Senior Seminar I 
Dance Senior Seminar I is a Fall semester, three credit hours course designed for the Dance major student sequentially completing the Dance major curriculum courses of study in preparation for the professional field of Dance Arts. 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 037: Methods of Teaching Dance 
The Methods of Teaching Dance course is designed for senior dance majors as an introduction to teaching/learning styles. Prerequisites: at least two of THDN 001, 007, 008, 009, 010, 015, 020; 021, 022, 029, 030, 031, 065, 066; THMT 067, and 068. Students may supplement field work for class credit. Any field-work or internships for supplemental learning must be cleared by the professor before the add/drop deadline. 
Credits: 
3 

THDN 039: Artist and Dance Experience I 
Course designed to experience the actual depth of dance inclusive of independent responsibilities that include assignments with instructors, artistic directors, administrators, choreographers, and dance companies. 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 040: Artist and Dance Experience II 
The continuing course that focuses on practical application of the requirements for total involvement and development as an artist preparing to enter the dance arts profession. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
THDN 039. Spring semester. 

THDN 046: African Dance III 
This course generally taught by guest artists is a studio course in application of traditional African dance movements, history, and music from a specific region (Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania, Mozambique, South Africa, etc.) for stage performance. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
THDN 016, or consent of instructor. Spring semester. 

THDN 049: Maj/Mn Dance Orient I 
Introduces modern dance vocabulary, including stretching and strengthening exercises, alignment, movement phrases, and basic locomotor skills. Includes performances and discussion. 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 053: Fund. of Dance I 
Fundamentals of modern dance focusing primarily on the development of techniques and creative problem solving. Basic anatomy, dance terminology, and a general overview of modern dance history. 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 055: Dance Fundamentals III 
Continuation of THDN 054. 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 061: Dance Senior Seminar w/Lab II 
Dance Senior Seminar II with Lab is a Spring semester, three credit hour course designed for the Dance major student sequentially completing the Dance major curriculum courses of study in preparation for the professional field of Dance Arts. 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 062: Contemporary Trends in Dance I 
Contemporary Trends in Dance I & II are designed for the third/fourth year student to experience the depth of a career in dance. This class exposes students to relevant resources available to dance professionals and pertinent trends in dance. Combining these elements with prior and/or future coursework within the dance major program, students acquire preparatory tools for entering the dance arts profession. Coursework will include (but not be limited to) Professional Representation (Agents, Contracts), Dance in Academia (Choreography as Research, Residencies), Networking and Relationships, Management, and 20 and 21st century Trends/Current Resources for Artists. Students also receive management experience via the Kankouran Dance Conference. 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 065: Beginning Tap 
Studio practice in the dance form derived from the traditional fast footwork steps of African Americans, using syncopated rhythms. Spring semester. 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 067: Kines Charact Dev. & Storytelling 
Credits: 
3 

THDN 071: Dance Major Movement Tech. 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 072: Dance Major Movement Tech. 
Continuation of THDN 071 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 075: Contemporary Trends in Dance II 
A continuation of THDN 062. 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 077: Dance Techniques II 
Continuation of THDN 076 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 090: Maj/Mn Dance Orient II 
For dance majors and other students with an interest in the professional dance world. Builds strength and control necessary for further advanced study. 
Credits: 
2 

THDN 199: Dance/Theatre Practicum 
Credits: 
1 

THDN 200: Dance Technical Production I 
Credits: 
1 

THDN 209: Dance Internship 
The dance internship is intended to be a culminating experience for students who are pursuing dance to explore career opportunities in dance fields other than, or in addition to, those with a choreographic or performance emphasis. Students can apply knowledge and skills developed in their major studies to a practical work experience 
Credits: 
0 

THDN 225: Dance Technical Production II 
Continuation of THDN 200 
Credits: 
1 

THDN 300: Dance for Non-Majors 
 A series of dance foundation and styles to include ballet, tap, dance and hip hop. 
Credits: 
2 

THTT 205: Lighting the Dance 
Credits: 
3 

Pre-directing 
THPD 
THPD 030: Begin. Directing 
This course introduces the principles, procedures, and practices of stage direction.   
Credits: 
3 

THPD 031: Beginning Directing II 
Continuation of THPD 030. This course introduces the principles, procedures, and practices of stage direction. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THPD 030. 

THPD 032: Intermediate Directing I (Styles) 
Exploration into various styles of stage direction and the history of the director. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THPD 030 and consent of instructor. Fall semester only. 

THPD 033: Intermediate Directing II (Periods) 
Focus on spot problems of individual student directors, scene work. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
THPD 030, THPD 032 and consent of instructor. Spring semester only. 

THPD 034: Directing: Reader’s Theatre/ Adaptations 
This course is aimed towards learning how to adapt literature and poetry to the stage and how to direct stage readings of both new and old plays. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor. 

THPD 135: Directing Seminar: Apprenticeship/ Community or Professional Theatre 
Individual projects in directing in cooperation with community or professional theatre. 
Credits: 
3 

THPD 138: Independent Study: Directing 
Designed by student and instructor to pursue a specific area of interest in directing. Project may be in cooperation with Department, community or professional theatre. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor and THPD 030, THPD 032, THPD 033. 

THPD 139: Senior Seminar 
Exploration of communication between directors, actors, technicians and administrators in scene work culminating in a student directed production. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor and THPD 190. 

Musical Theatre 
THMT 
THMT 041: Int to Theory for Music Thea 
This lecture/practicum course introduces students to basic music literacy skills covering the fundamentals of Western music theory. 
Credits: 
3 

THMT 042: Ear Training / Sight Singing for Musical Theatre I 
.This course is designed to introduce students to the concepts and techniques of sight singing. Students study a variety of methodologies including solfège, interval training, movable and immovable “do,” and relative pitch memory. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
Intro to Music Theory for Musical Theatre (THMT 041) 

THMT 043: Ear Training / Sight Singing for Musical Theatre II 
This course is designed to continue the study of reading music as a singer, pitch recognition and prediction and further analysis and training of melodic and harmonic singing. Using material from 20th century American (and international) Musical Theater pedagogy, the course provides a variety of ways into quickly reading, understanding and performing musical theater works. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
Ear Training / Sight Singing for Musical Theatre I (THMT 042) 

THMT 044: Musical Theater Standards 
This course is designed to utilize the skills of previous Ear Training courses to familiarize students with the general canon of American Musical Theater repertoire. This course is taught as an “Independent Study,” meeting only at determined days and times to review student progress. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
Ear Training / Sight Singing for Musical Theatre II (THMT 043) 

THMT 067: Beginning Jazz 
Contemporary and specific technique (traditional jazz dance, Luigi, Giordani, etc.) Spring semester. 
Credits: 
2 

THMT 101: Musical Theatre Techniques I (THMT 101) 
This course is designed to introduce students to the craft of storytelling through song. Acting techniques are combined with vocal techniques as well as exercises in lyric interpretation and dramatic shaping to bring students to honest, organic presentations of solo sung material. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Acting Character / Scene Study II (THAC 024) 

THMT 102: Musical Theatre Techniques II 
.Building on the concepts of Musical Theatre Techniques I, students expand their synthesis of musical theater through the study of scene-to-song, duets and movement. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Musical Theatre Techniques I (THMT 101) 

THMT 103: Musical Theatre Techniques III 
The primary objective of Musical Theatre Techniques III is to build upon and further develop the concepts of storytelling through song and movement, as taught in Musical Theater Techniques I and II, through mounting a one-act book musical. Through guided instruction, students will learn how to: 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Musical Theatre Techniques II (THMT 102) 

THMT 104: Musical Theatre Techniques IV 
This primary objective of Musical Theatre Techniques IV is the successful completion of a 35-45 minute solo cabaret presentation. Classes, workshops, seminars, symposia and other supplemental coursework are all designed to bring the student to a high quality culminating performance. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Musical Theatre Techniques III (THMT 103). 

THMT 105: History of Music Theatre 
A historical survey course of the development, progression, contributions, and structure of the musical theatre form. The course will examine related forms such as opera and musical comedy. 
Credits: 
3 

THMT 111: Voice for Musical Theatre I 
.An introduction to proper vocal technique. Through the classroom/group setting, students learn about the anatomy/physiology of the voice and its usage (lectures) and fundamental exercises on building foundational vocal technique (breathing, support and placement labs). 
Credits: 
1 

THMT 112: Voice for Musical Theatre II 
.Prerequisite: Voice for Musical Theatre I (THMT 111).A continuation of Voice for Musical Theatre I. Students continue foundational vocal technique study through smaller group labs. This course culminates in a “Freshman Showcase,” where students apply material in conjunction with other musical theater elements in an open performance. 
Credits: 
1 

THMT 113: Voice for Musical Theatre III 
.Prerequisite: Voice for Musical Theatre II (THMT 112).In one-on-one lessons, students begin delving into the uniqueness of their individual voices and how to healthily use them. Particular attention is given to unifying the registers of the voice across the passagio (una voce). Focusing on application of foundational techniques through limited, directed literature (classical vocalises and traditional musical theater), students also begin wedding technique with artistic expression. 
Credits: 
1 

THMT 114: Voice for Musical Theatre IV 
.Prerequisite: Voice for Musical Theatre III (THMT 113).A continuation of Voice for Musical Theatre III. Literature is expanded to include contemporary musical theater. 
Credits: 
1 

THMT 115: Voice for Musical Theatre V 
.Prerequisite: Voice for Musical Theatre IV (THMT 114).Continuing with private instruction and building on concepts and experience from Voice for Musical Theater IV, students further explore more advanced vocal techniques through more difficult and varied song selections. Students use performances (Wednesdays at Noon) to further develop skills in applying vocal technique to aid in storytelling. 
Credits: 
1 

THMT 116: Voice for Musical Theatre 
.Prerequisite: Voice for Musical Theatre V (THMT 115).Further advanced vocal technique and storytelling study. Students continue their performance development through Wednesdays at Noon performances. Students explore a much larger and broader repertoire of material. 
Credits: 
1 

THMT 117: Voice for Musical Theatre VII 
.Using material and repertoire gained from previous semesters of Voice for Musical Theatre I through VI, students begin choosing material for their final Senior Cabaret as well as identify songs and formally develop their Audition Book. Students study a variety of genres of music, including pop, R&B, gospel, rock, etc. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Voice for Musical Theatre VI (THMT 116) 

THMT 118: Voice for Musical Theatre VIII 
This course is designed specifically to support the quality vocal execution of the final Senior Cabaret. Students also continue work on their Audition Book and any additional vocal material requested by the instructor. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Voice for Musical Theatre VII (THMT 117) 

World Languages 
http://www.coas.howard.edu/worldlanguagesandcultures 
The Department of World Languages and Cultures offers majors in French and Spanish and an undergraduate program leading to secondary teacher education certification in French and Spanish. Minors are available in German and Russian. In addition to the major and minor programs, the department offers a four-semester language sequence in Arabic, Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Portuguese, Swahili, and Wolof. A unique feature of all undergraduate programs and courses is the incorporation, where applicable and possible, of content related to African American and African contributions to the historical and sociocultural development of world cultures. 
Please refer to the World Languages section of the Course Directory for listings of all languages courses offered by the department. 
AMHR 001: Amharic I 
This course provides an introduction to the basic language skills (speaking, listening, reading, and writing), with emphasis on proficiency. 
Credits: 
3 

ZULU 1: Zulu I 
Credits: 
3 

ZULU 2: Zulu II 
Credits: 
3 

ZULU 3: Zulu III 
Credits: 
3 

Amharic 
AMHR 002: Amharic II 
A continuation of AMHR 001 
Credits: 
3 

AMHR 003: Amharic III 
A continuation of AMHR 002 
Credits: 
3 

AMHR 190: Amharic Independent Study 
Designed to provide independent study/research under the guidance of a faculty advisor or the equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 

Arabic 
ARAB 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
ARAB 001: Arabic I 
This course provides an introduction to the basic language skills (speaking, listening, reading and writing). A proficiency-oriented approach is used in the course. 
Credits: 
3 

ARAB 002: Arabic II 
A continuation of ARAB 001. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARAB 001 or equivalent. 

ARAB 003: Arabic III 
An intermediate level course designed to further enhance speaking, listening, reading, and writing in Arabic. Cultural activities are included. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARAB 002 or equivalent. 

ARAB 004: Arabic IV 
A continuation of ARAB 003. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARAB 003 or equiv. 

ARAB 040: Intensive Grammar Review 
A core course in the major-minor sequence which includes a thorough review of and practice with major elements of French grammar. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARAB 004. 

ARAB 050: Oral Expression I 
A course designed to develop speaking and listening skills through a variety of instructional strategies. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARAB 004. 

ARAB 051: Oral Expression II 
A continuation of ARAB 050 or the equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARAB 050 or equivalent. 

ARAB 190: Independent Study I 
Designed to provide independent study/research under the guidance of a faculty advisor or the equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of Instructor. 

ARAB 191: Independent Study II 
Advanced independent study/research under the guidance of a faculty advisor or the equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of Instructor. 

Somali 
SOMA 001: Somali I 
This course provides an introduction to the basic Somali language skills (speaking, listening, reading, and writing), with emphasis on proficiency 
Credits: 
3 

SOMA 002: Somali II 
Continued development of the basic language skills in Somali through integration of classroom drills and language exercises. 
Credits: 
3 

Chinese 
CHIN 
CHIN 001: Chinese I 
This course provides an introduction to the basic language skills (speaking, listening, reading and writing). A proficiency-oriented approach is used in the course. 
Credits: 
3 

CHIN 002: Chinese II 
A continuation of CHIN 001. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHIN 001 or equivalent. 

CHIN 003: Chinese III 
An intermediate level course designed to further enhance speaking, listening, reading, and writing in Chinese. Cultural activities are included. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHIN 002 or equivalent. 

CHIN 004: Chinese IV 
A continuation of CHIN 003. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHON 003 or equivalent. 

CHIN 050: Oral Expression I 
A course designed to develop speaking and listening skills through a variety of instructional strategies. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHIN 004 

CHIN 190: Independent Study 
Designed to provide independent study/research under the guidance of a faculty advisor or the equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of Instructor. 

CHIN 191: Independent Study II 
Advanced independent study/research under the guidance of a faculty advisor or the equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of Instructor. 

French 
FREN 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
FREN 001: French I 
A course which provides an introduction to the basic language skills (comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing) with emphasis on proficiency. 
Credits: 
3 

FREN 002: French II 
Continuation of FREN 001, with additional drills to increase attention in class to the relationship between speaking and writing. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FREN 001 or the equivalent. 

FREN 003: French III 
Continued development of audio-lingual and written skills, with reading, oral discussion and continued presentation of grammar and syntax. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FREN 002 or the equivalent. 

FREN 004: French IV 
Intensive reading of texts dealing with literature and culture with emphasis on speaking and writing along with vocabulary expansion. 
Credits: 
3 

FREN 012: Intensive French I & II 
First part of a concentrated two-semester course that allows the student to complete the language requirement in one year. No prerequisites. 
Credits: 
6 

FREN 013: Intensive French III & IV 
Continuation of FREN 012. 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
FREN 012 or equivalent. 

FREN 014: Introduction to Humanities I 
The first part of two-semester core course for freshmen designed to enhance their understanding of great and enduring themes of humanistic inquiry. Students read literary and philosophical works of major historical significance and value from a contemporary viewpoint. Students explore themes such as cultural collision and resolution, concentrating on various aspects of the epic tradition. 
Credits: 
3 

FREN 015: Introduction to Humanities II 
The second part of a two-semester core course for freshmen. In this course students study the relationship of the self to the other, with all its attendant considerations, and concentrate on generic distinctions between comedy and tragedy in drama, autobiography, and fiction. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FREN 014. 

FREN 040: Intensive Grammar Review 
A core course in the major-minor sequence which includes a thorough review of and practice with major elements of French grammar. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FREN 004 

FREN 050: Oral Expression I 
A course designed to develop speaking and listening skills through a variety of instructional strategies. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FREN 004. 

FREN 051: Oral Expression II 
A continuation of FREN 050 or the equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 

FREN 052: Reading and Writing Workshop 
Designed to develop the specific skills of reading and writing in French. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FREN 004. 

FREN 055: Advanced Oral Expression 
Designed to foster advanced proficiency in sustained speech in French. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FREN 051 or the equivalent. 

FREN 060: Textual Analysis 
Transitional course designed to prepare students for the analysis of texts, studies from the literary and linguistic points of view. Develops a keener objective appraisal of the written word and permits a more refined sense of criticism. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FREN 052. 

FREN 064: French for the News Media 
For students interested in working with the news media, includes writing of newspaper articles and preparation and interpretation of sketches for broadcasting programs etc. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FREN 052 or the equivalent. 

FREN 065: Simultaneous Interpretation I, 
Introduces students to the basic techniques of escort, consecutive, and particularly simultaneous interpretation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
3 semesters of a foreign language or the equivalent. 

FREN 066: Simultaneous Interpretation II 
Focuses on more advanced techniques of simultaneous and consecutive interpretation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Simultaneous Interpretation I or the equivalent. 

FREN 077: Advanced Grammar and Composition 
Course in advanced prose writing, stressing control of syntactic structures and stylistic devices. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FREN 040. 

FREN 078: Business French 
Prepares students to deal with the business community and business correspondence in French. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FREN 077. 

FREN 082: Survey of French Literature and Civilization I 
A study of French literature of the Middle Ages through the 17th Century. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FREN 060. 

FREN 082: Survey of French Lit & Civ I 
Credits: 
3 

FREN 083: Survey of French Literature and Civilization II 
A continuation of FREN 082 covering the 18th, 19th and the 20th centuries. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FREN 060. 

FREN 084: Survey of AFRO French Civilization and Literature 
Survey of AFRO French contributions to literature and culture. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FREN 060. 

FREN 085: Survey of AFRO Caribbean Literature 
Survey of AFRO Caribbean literature of French expression. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FREN 060. 

FREN 093, 094: Directed Readings for Sophomores 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
1 

FREN 095, 096: Directed Readings for Juniors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
1 

FREN 098, 099: Senior Department Honors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
3 

FREN 100: Francophone Literature in English 
Study of masterpieces of literature in translation. Genre to be chosen by the instructor. 
Credits: 
3 

FREN 106: African Cinema 
This course examines Africa in film as well as films produced in Africa. It places cinema in Sub Saharan Africa in its social, cultural, and aesthetic contexts ranging from neocolonial to postcolonial, Western to Southern Africa, documentary to fiction, art cinema to TV, and includes films that reflect on the impact of global trends in Africa and local responses, as well as changing racial and gender identifications. 
Credits: 
3 

FREN 107: Women in Literature 
An introduction to the role of women in the humanities. Investigates women as authors and subjects in Philosophy, German, Russian, Classics, English and the Romance Languages. The faculty will come from the individual departments. 
Credits: 
3 

FREN 110: Medieval French Literature 
Analysis of representative works of the Middle Ages from La Chanson de Roland to Francois Villon, with the texts examined in a general socio-historical context. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FREN 080. 

FREN 115: Sixteenth Century: Renaissance 
Examination of France’s cultural heritage in the 16th century with the evolution of literary forms studied against the backdrop of cultural transformation. Readings from Ronsard, Rabelais, Du Bellay, Calvin, and Montaigne. 
Credits: 
3 

FREN 120: Seventeenth Century Literature 
Drama and Prose readings from Descartes, Pascal, Bossuet, Mme de Sevigne, Boileau, Mme de Lafayette, La Bruyere, Corneille, Moliere, and Racine. 
Credits: 
3 

FREN 125: Eighteenth Century Literature 
Survey course covering the philosophical and social ideology of the Age of Enlightenment in France. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FREN 083. 

FREN 130: Nineteenth Century Literature 
Representative selection of writings from the literary movements of the period. 
Credits: 
3 

FREN 140: Twentieth Century Literature 
A study of major literary currents and writers from 1900 to present. 
Credits: 
3 

FREN 150: Franco-Caribbean Civilization and Literature 
Study of sociopolitical and literary trends in French-speaking countries. 
Credits: 
3 

FREN 160: Francophone Africa: Civilization and Literature 
Study of texts reflecting historical, cultural and literary evolution in Francophone Africa. 
Credits: 
3 

FREN 171: French Linguistics 
Analysis of the phonology, morphology, syntax and semantics of French. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FREN 040. 

FREN 172: French Phonology 
Intensive study of the sounds of the French language through symbols and spellings. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FREN 040. 

FREN 177: Introduction to French-English Translation 
Designed to develop beginning skills in translation from French into English. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FREN 040. 

FREN 178: Advanced French-English Translation 
Continuation of FREN 177. 
Credits: 
3 

FREN 187: Educational Methods in Foreign Language Teaching 
Introduction to methods, materials, and techniques in foreign language instruction. 
Credits: 
3 

FREN 190: Independent Study I 
Designed to provide independent study/research under the guidance of a faculty advisor or the equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of Instructor. 

FREN 191: Independent Study II 
Advanced independent study/research under the guidance of a faculty advisor or the equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of Instructor. 

FREN 194: Francophone Film 
Study of France and francophone countries through film, from cultural, sociological and technical points of view. 
Credits: 
3 

German 
GERM 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
GERM 001: German I 
Designed to teach students to communicate in German by focusing on useful vocabulary and everyday situations. Students will acquire skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing German while gaining insight into the culture of German-speaking countries. No prerequisite. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 002: German II 
Reinforces the range of skills practiced in German 001, while focusing on expanding the student’s vocabulary and fluency. The emphasis is on active participation as a means of expanding speaking, listening, reading and writing skills introduced in German 001. Students are prepared to handle real situations in foreign culture. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 001 or equivalent. 

GERM 003: German III 
Advances study of the German language with an audiovisual approach. Literary readers are studied. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 002 or equivalent. 

GERM 004: German IV 
Advanced course in which the student reads the most recent German prose. Composition and speaking are emphasized. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 003 or equivalent. 

GERM 005: German for Music Students 
Emphasis on pronunciation of German. Intensive study of German “Lieder” texts and the 19th-century tradition from which they come. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 010: Scientific German 
Reading course for science majors and for those pursuing the professional courses in medicine and dentistry. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 003 or equivalent. 

GERM 011: Business German 
Focuses on the German market economy, the structure of German corporations, banking system, in addition to promoting the mastery of German business terminology. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 012: Intensive German I 
Intensive. Video-format approach to learning German based on the Dartmouth Intensive Language Model. No prerequisite. 
Credits: 
6 

GERM 013: Intensive German II 
Continuation of GERM 012. 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 012. 

GERM 014: Introduction to Humanities I, 
is the first part of a two-semester core course for freshmen designed to enhance their understanding of great and enduring themes of humanistic inquiry. Students read literary and philosophical works of major historical significance and value from a contemporary viewpoint. Students explore themes such as cultural collision and resolution, concentrating on various aspects of the epic tradition. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 015: Introduction to Humanities II, 
is the second part of a two-semester core course for freshmen In this course students study the relationship of the self to the other, with all its attendant considerations, and concentrate on generic distinctions between comedy and tragedy in drama, autobiography, and fiction. Prerequisite is Humanities I. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 040: Intensive Grammar Review 
A core course in the major-minor sequence which includes a thorough review of and practice with major elements of French grammar. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 004. 

GERM 065: Simultaneous Interpretation I, 
Introduces students to the basic techniques of escort, consecutive, and particularly simultaneous interpretation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
3 semesters of a foreign language or the equivalent. GERM 004 or equivalent. 

GERM 066: Simultaneous Interpretation II, 
Focuses on more advanced techniques of simultaneous and consecutive interpretation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Simultaneous Interpretation I or the equivalent. 

GERM 084, 085: Directed Readings for Sophomores 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
1 

GERM 088, 089: Directed Readings for Juniors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
1 

GERM 092, 093: Senior Departmental Honors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 100: Individual and Society 
Centers around the success or failure of the individual coming to terms with society, as presented by selected German writers. Divisional Studies A. Open to all students. No knowledge of German required. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 101: Literature of Love 
Explores the concept of “love” in the Western world. It begins with a representative work from the Age of Courtly Love and ends with a contemporary work about a child who is denied love, The Bluest Eye. Divisional Studies A. Open to all students. No knowledge of German required. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 107: Women in Literature 
An introduction to the role of women in the humanities. Investigates women as writers and their contributions to the disciplines of philosophy. German, Russian, classics, English and the Romance languages. Because of the interdisciplinary nature of the course, it will be team-taught by faculty from the departments in the Humanities Division. (See also CLAS 107; ENGL 107; FREN 107; and HUM 108). 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 109: Northern Myths and Legends 
A survey of the great myths, epics and romances in Icelandic, Welsh, German, French and English medieval literature. Divisional Studies A. Open to all students. No knowledge of German required. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 111: Classic Films in English 
Acquaints students with 14 classic German and Soviet films, the historical eras they depict, and their importance to the history of film-making. Divisional Studies A. Open to all students. No knowledge of German required. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 112: Scandinavian Films and Dramas 
A multi- media course surveying the dramas of Ibsen and Strindberg and the films of Igmar Bergman. No prerequisites. Open to all students. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 114: The Film and the Novel 
Discussion of a select number of novels (or novellas) in comparison with their film versions, emphasizing the virtues and the limitations of each art form. No prerequisites. Open to all students. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 115: Marxism and Literature 
An introduction to Marxist interpretations of literature, and the arts in general from Marx and Engels to the present. No prerequisites. Open to all students. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 116: Freud, Jung and Literature, 
Explores the trends in 20th-century criticism to interpret literature from a psychoanalytical point of view. No prerequisites. Open to all students. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 117: Folklore and Fairytale 
An exploration of the rich German tradition of folklore and fairytales. No prerequisites. Open to all students. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 118: The Holocaust in Film and Literature 
A study of the attempts of writers and filmmakers to reflect on the horrors of the Nazi holocaust. No prerequisites. Open to all students. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 119: The Third Reich Through Films 
Explores a wide variety of classical films about the Third Reich. The films selected will offer different points of focus. No prerequisites. Open to all students. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 120: Exile Literature 
Analyzes the works of German authors in exile. Emphasis will be placed on the German writers in the United States and Brazil. Reading knowledge of German required. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 121: Contrasts in German and American Cultures 
Explores the links between German and American cultures, emphasizing how the German past has shaped American educational, political and artistic institutions. No prerequisites. Open to all students. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 125: Oral Proficiency I 
Designed to strengthen the student’s oral command of the German language. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 003. 

GERM 126: Oral Proficiency II 
Continuation of GERM 125. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 125. 

GERM 127: Written Proficiency I 
Practical exercise in the writing of German expository prose. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 140. 

GERM 128: Written Proficiency II 
Continuation of GERM 127. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 127. 

GERM 130: Introduction to Literary Studies 
Guides students through the secondary works (literary histories, periodicals and bibliographies), methodological approaches of the basic schools of literary critics and literary genres. For majors and minors. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 004. 

GERM 131: Survey of German Language 
Diachronic and synchronic survey of the German language from Gothic to New High German. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 127. 

GERM 140: Introduction to German Literature 
Designed to acquaint the student with the major authors and literary movements from the 18th century to the present. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 004. 

GERM 145: German Culture 
Survey of German culture from Martin Luther to 1815. Divisional Studies B. Open to all students. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 146: German Culture 
Survey of German culture from 1815 to 1945. Divisional Studies B. Open to all students. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 147: Contemporary Germany 
Deals with the historical, economic, political, educational and artistic factors which bind as well as divide the former Federal Republic of Germany and the former German Democratic Republic. No prerequisites. Open to all students. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 151: German Literature of the Enlightenment and Sturm und Drang 
Survey of major German writers and thinkers of the 18th century. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 140. 

GERM 152: German Literature of Classicism and Romanticism 
Survey of German literature of the late 18th and early 19th centuries. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 140. 

GERM 153: German Literature From Biedermeier to Realism 
Survey of the major writers and literary movements of the period 1820-1890. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 140. 

GERM 154: German Literature From Naturalism to Expressionism 
Survey of the movements of Naturalism, Symbolism and New Romanticism, tracing the development to the emergence of Expressionism and its continuation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 140. 

GERM 155: German Literature After 1945 
Comprehensive survey of German literature from 1945 to the present. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 140. 

GERM 160: German Drama 
A survey of the theory and practice of works written for the German stage from Lessing to the present. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 140. 

GERM 161: German Novel 
The study of the structure of the novel from the Baroque to the present, as exemplified in representative works. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 140. 

GERM 162: German Lyric Poetry 
Traces the changes of the poetic idiom of German poetry from Klopstock to the present. The change in the basic assumptions about nature and the role of poetry is discussed as exemplified by representative texts. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 140. 

GERM 163: The German Novella 
The theory and development of this short narrative form from the age of Goethe to the 20th century. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 140. 

GERM 170: Goethe 
Survey of the major works of Goethe. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 140. 

GERM 171: Schiller 
Survey of the major works of Schiller. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 140. 

GERM 172: Heinrich Kleist 
Survey of the major works of Kleist. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 140. 

GERM 173: Heinrich Heine, 
An examination of Heine’s work as a poet, an essayist, and a polemicist. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 140. 

GERM 174: Fontane 
Survey of the major works of Fontane. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 140. 

GERM 175: Rilke 
A general introduction to Rilke’s poetry and prose with special emphasis on his early plays and his development from Buch der Bilder to Die Sonette an Orpheus 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 140. 

GERM 176: Kafka 
A survey of the major works of Kafka. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 140. 

GERM 177: Brecht 
In-depth analysis of the works of this major dramatist and poet of the 20th century. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
GERM 140. 

GERM 178: German Folklore, 
In-depth analysis of the rich heritage of German folklore. Prerequisite GERM 140. 
Credits: 
3 

GERM 179: Proseminar: Negritude and Germany 
Focuses on the reception of AFRO American, African and Caribbean authors in Germany, as well as the German influence on some of their works. Reading knowledge of German and French required. 
Credits: 
3 

Haitian Creole 
HACR 
HACR 001: Haitian Creole I 
This course provides an introduction to the basic language skills (speaking, listening, reading and writing). A proficiency-oriented approach is used in the course. 
Credits: 
3 

HACR 002: Haitian Creole II 
A continuation of HACR 001. 
Credits: 
3 

HACR 003: Haitian Creole III 
An intermediate level course designed to further enhance speaking, listening, reading, and writing in Haitian Creole. Cultural activities are included. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
HACR 002 or equivalent. 

HACR 004: Haitian Creole IV 
A continuation of HACR 003. 
Credits: 
3 

HACR 190: Independent Study I 
Designed to provide independent study/research under the guidance of a faculty advisor or the equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of Instructor. 

HACR 191: Independent Study II 
Advanced independent study/research under the guidance of a faculty advisor or the equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of Instructor. 

Japanese 
JAPN 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
JAPN 001: Japanese I 
This course provides an introduction to the basic language skills (speaking, listening, reading and writing). A proficiency-oriented approach is used in the course. 
Credits: 
3 

JAPN 002: Japanese II 
A continuation of JAPN 001. 
Credits: 
3 

JAPN 003: Japanese III 
An intermediate level course designed to further enhance speaking, listening, reading, and writing in Japanese. Cultural activities are included. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JAPN 002 or equivalent. 

JAPN 004: Japanese IV 
A continuation of JAPN 003. 
Credits: 
3 

JAPN 040: Intensive Grammar Review 
A core course in the major-minor sequence which includes a thorough review of and practice with major elements of French grammar. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JAPN 004. 

JAPN 050: Oral Expression I 
A course designed to develop speaking and listening skills through a variety of instructional strategies. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JAPN 004. 

JAPN 190: Independent Study I 
Designed to provide independent study/research under the guidance of a faculty advisor or the equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of Instructor. 

JAPN 191: Independent Study II 
Advanced independent study/research under the guidance of a faculty advisor or the equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of Instructor. 

Korean 
KORE 
KORE 001: Korean I 
This course provides an introduction to the basic language skills (speaking, listening, reading and writing). A proficiency-oriented approach is used in the course. 
Credits: 
3 

KORE 002: Korean II 
A continuation of KORE 001. 
Credits: 
3 

KORE 003: Korean III 
An intermediate level course designed to further enhance speaking, listening, reading, and writing in Korean. Cultural activities are included. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
KORE 002 or equivalent. 

KORE 004: Korean IV 
A continuation of KORE 003. 
Credits: 
3 

Portuguese 
PORT 
PORT 001: Elementary Brazilian Portuguese 
This course provides an introduction to the basic language skills (speaking, listening, reading, and writing), with emphasis on the communicative approach. 
Credits: 
4 

PORT 002: Elementary Brazilian Portuguese 
Continued development of the basic language skills in Portuguese through integration of classroom drills and language exercises. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
PORT 001 or the equivalent. 

PORT 003: Intermediate Brazilian Portuguese 
Continuation of the development of communicative skills with reading and oral discussion. Also includes an introduction to Luso-Brazilian culture and introduces selections by AFRO Brazilian writers. 
Credits: 
3 

PORT 004: Intermediate Brazilian Portuguese 
Continued reading of selections by AFRO Brazilian writers, with intensive readings on topics of Luso-Brazilian culture and expansion of vocabulary useful for conservation and composition. 
Credits: 
3 

PORT 040: Intensive Grammar Review 
A core course in the major-minor sequence which includes a thorough review of and practice with major elements of French grammar. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PORT 004. 

PORT 050: Oral Expression I 
A course designed to develop speaking and listening skills through a variety of instructional strategies. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PORT 004. 

PORT 190: Independent Study I 
Designed to provide independent study/research under the guidance of a faculty advisor or the equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of Instructor. 

PORT 191: Independent Study II 
Advanced independent study/research under the guidance of a faculty advisor or the equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of Instructor. 

Russian 
RUSS 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
RUSS 001: Russian I 
A classroom approach to the basic spoken as well as written elements of the language. No prerequisite, but no credit is given for this course unless RUSS 002 is also completed. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 002: Russian II 
Intensified continuation of RUSS 001, with more emphasis on reading. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
RUSS 001 or its equivalent. 

RUSS 003: Russian I 
Advanced, audio-lingual study of the Russian language, in which literary readers are studied. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RUSS 002 or its equivalent. 

RUSS 004: Russian II 
Advanced course in which students read the most recent Russian prose, with emphasis on the development of written and oral skills. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RUSS 003 or its equivalent. 

RUSS 005: Intensive Russian I 
First part of a concentrated two-semester course that allows the student to complete the language requirement in one year. 
Credits: 
6 

RUSS 006: Intensive Russian II 
Continuation of RUSS 005. 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
RUSS 005. 

RUSS 010: Business Russian 
Advanced course that familiarizes the student with the basic concepts and terminology used in commercial transactions in Russian. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
One year of Russian. 

RUSS 014: Introduction to Humanities I, 
is the first part of a two-semester core course for freshmen designed to enhance their understanding of great and enduring themes of humanistic inquiry. Students read literary and philosophical works of major historical significance and value from a contemporary viewpoint. Students explore themes such as cultural collision and resolution, concentrating on various aspects of the epic tradition. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 015: Introduction to Humanities II, 
is the second part of a two-semester core course for freshmen. In this course students study the relationship of the self to the other, with all its attendant considerations, and concentrate on generic distinctions between comedy and tragedy in drama, autobiography, and fiction. Prerequisite is Humanities I. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 020: Simultaneous Interpretation I, 
Introduces students to the basic techniques of escort, consecutive, and particularly simultaneous interpretation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
3 semesters of a foreign language or the equivalent. 

RUSS 021: Simultaneous Interpretation II, 
Focuses on more advanced techniques of simultaneous and consecutive interpretation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Simultaneous Interpretation I or the equivalent. 

RUSS 084, 085: Directed Readings for Sophomores 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. A Honors course. 
Credits: 
1 

RUSS 088, 089: Directed Readings for Juniors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. A Honors course. 
Credits: 
1 

RUSS 092, 093: Senior Departmental Honors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. A Honors course. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 100: Great Short Stories 
Involves the reading of Russian short stories. Open to all students and no knowledge of Russian is required. Divisional Studies A. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 101: Literature of Revolution 
Presents major works of Russian literature in English translation. Open to all students, and no knowledge of Russian is required. Divisional Studies A. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 103: Love and Hate 
Survey in English of the outstanding Russian classics such as Anna Karenina. No knowledge of Russian is required. Divisional Studies A. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 109: Slavic Mythology 
Presents Slavic myths from ancient through historical times. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 111: Classic Films in English 
Acquaints students with 14 classic German and Soviet movies, the historical eras they depict, and their importance in the history of film. Films will be discussed. Divisional Studies A. Open to all students. No knowledge of German or Russian required. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 117: Russian Science Fiction in Translation 
Study of the major trends of science fiction in the works of modern Russian authors. No knowledge of Russian is required. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 125: Russian Composition 
Designed to improve the student’s Russian reading and writing skills. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RUSS 004. 

RUSS 126: Russian Conversation 
Stresses the development of oral communication skills. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 127: Advanced Russian Composition and Conversation 
Continuation of RUSS 125 and RUSS 126 for majors and minors in Russian. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 140: Old Russian and Eighteenth-Century Literature 
Survey of the history of the Russian language and the first major literary efforts through the 18th century. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 141: Russian Romanticism: Pushkin to Gumilev 
Study of 19th-century Russian authors whose works mark a departure from the formalism of French classicism to the free-spirited emotionalism of German and English romanticism. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 145: Russian Culture 
Examines the development of Russian political and social institutions and intellectual currents. Divisional Studies B. Open to all students. No knowledge of Russian required. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 146: Politics of Culture 
Analyzes the former Soviet Union and its political, social, and intellectual institutions. Divisional Studies B. Open to all students. No knowledge of Russian required. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 150: The Three Rs: Revolution, Rebellion, Resignation 
Survey of Russian and Soviet works that reflect the political aspirations and disillusionment of the Russian people. Divisional Studies B. Open to all students. No knowledge of Russian required. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 170 through 032-173: Seminars 
Special literary and cultural topics are selected for in-depth discussion each seminar. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 174: Dissident Voices in Russian Art and Literature 
Studies the works of writers and artists banned by the Soviet government. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 188: History of the Russian Language 
Readings and discussion of development and structure of the Russian language in context with other Slavic languages. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 189: Literature of the Seventeenth Century 
Readings in Russian in the beginnings of modern Russian literature; theories of poetics and poetic language; development of genres (satire, tragedy, odes); and beginning of investigative journalism in Russian literature. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 190: Literature of the Nineteenth Century 
Readings in Russian and discussion of the classics of Russian literature, including Pushkin, Gogol, Dostoevsky, and Tolstoy. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 191: Old Church Slavonic 
Study and analysis of ancient Slavic texts. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 192: Russian Realism 
Examines Russian literature, including Gogol, Turgenev, Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, and Chekhov. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 193: Soviet Poetry 
Consists of reading and discussion of poetry written since the Russian Revolution. 
Credits: 
3 

RUSS 198: Structure of Russian 
Synchronic linguistic analysis of the Russian language. 
Credits: 
3 

Spanish 
SPAN 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
SPAN 001: Spanish I 
This course provides an introduction to the basic language skills (speaking, listening, reading, and writing), with emphasis on proficiency. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 002: Spanish II 
Continued development of the basic language skills in Spanish through integration of classroom drills and language exercises. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SPAN 001 or the equivalent. 

SPAN 003: Spanish III 
Continuation of the development of audiolingual skills, with reading and oral discussion. Also includes an introduction to Hispanic culture and review of grammar and syntax. Prerequisite:SPAN 002 or the equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 004: Spanish IV 
Intensive reading of topics of Hispanic literature and culture, with emphasis on composition and conversation, along with vocabulary expansion. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SPAN 003 or the equivalent. 

SPAN 014: Introduction to Humanities I 
The first part of two-semester core course for freshmen designed to enhance their understanding of great and enduring themes of humanistic inquiry. Students read literary and philosophical works of major historical significance and value from a contemporary viewpoint. Students explore themes such as cultural collision and resolution, concentrating on various aspects of the epic tradition. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 015: Introduction to Humanities II 
The second part of a two-semester core course for freshmen. In this course students study the relationship of the self to the other, with all its attendant considerations, and concentrate on generic distinctions between comedy and tragedy in drama, autobiography, and fiction. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SPAN 014. 

SPAN 040: Intensive Grammar Review 
A core course in the major-minor sequence which includes a thorough review of and practice with major elements of Spanish grammar. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SPAN 004. 

SPAN 050: Oral Expression I 
A course designed to develop speaking and listening skills through a variety of instructional strategies. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SPAN 004. 

SPAN 051: Oral Expression II 
A continuation of SPAN 050 or its equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 052: Reading and Writing Workshop 
Designed to develop the specific skills of reading and writing in Spanish. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SPAN 004. 

SPAN 055: Advanced Oral Expression I 
An advanced level course to develop aural/oral fluency in Spanish. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SPAN 051 or its equivalent. 

SPAN 060: Textual Analysis 
Introduction to literary texts and terminology through the reading of representative genres studied and interpreted from a literary and linguistic point of view. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SPAN 052. 

SPAN 064: Spanish for the News Media 
Intended for students interested in the news media. Includes writing news articles and preparing and interpreting broadcasting programs for radio and television. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SPAN 040 or equivalent. 

SPAN 065: Simultaneous Interpretation I, 
Introduces students to the basic techniques of escort, consecutive, and particularly simultaneous interpretation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
3 semesters of a foreign language or the equivalent. 

SPAN 066: Simultaneous Interpretation II, 
Focuses on more advanced techniques of simultaneous and consecutive interpretation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Simultaneous Interpretation I or the equivalent. 

SPAN 077: Advanced Composition 
Course in advanced prose writing stressing control of syntactic structures and stylistic devices. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SPAN 040. 

SPAN 078: Business Spanish 
Prepares students to deal with the business community and business correspondence in Spanish. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SPAN 077. 

SPAN 080: Survey of Spanish Literature I 
A survey of Spanish literature in a historical and cultural context from the Middle Ages to 1700. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SPAN 060. 

SPAN 081: Survey of Spanish Civilization and Literature II 
Continuation of SPAN 080 from 1700 to present. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SPAN 080. 

SPAN 083: Survey of Latin American Literature and civilization I 
A survey of Latin American literature in a historical and cultural context from the pre-Colombian era to 1900. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SPAN 060. 

SPAN 084: Survey of Latin American Literature and civilization II 
A continuation of SPAN 083 from 1900 to the present. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 085: Survey of AFRO Hispanic Literature 
Survey of AFRO Hispanic contributions to Spanish and Spanish American literature and culture. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SPAN 060. 

SPAN 089: Hispanic Peoples and Cultures 
A course on the sociopolitical institutions, literary and other cultural contributions of the peoples of the Spanish-speaking world. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SPAN 060. 

SPAN 093, 094: Readings for Sophomores 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
1 

SPAN 095, 096: Directed Readings for Juniors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
1 

SPAN 098, 099: Seniors Honors Thesis 
Support of the conceptualization, development, and writing of a thesis or capstone project by a faculty member. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 100: Hispanic Literature in English 
Consists of selected readings, in translation, of masterpieces of Spanish and Spanish-American literature. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 101: AFRO Hispanic Literature in English 
Course is designed to present a survey of translated literature from medieval to contemporary periods by and about people of African descent in Spain and Spanish America. Class discussion is in English. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 107: Women in Literature 
An introduction to the role of women in the humanities, the course will investigate women as authors and subjects in philosophy, German, Russian, classics, English, and the romance languages. According with its interdisciplinary character, the faculty will come from all these departments. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 110: Medieval Literature 
An approach to Spanish literature from 1100 to 1500, with detailed study of the Cantar de mio Cid, Milagros de Nuestra Senora, El conde Lucanor, and the Libro de buen amor. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 120: Drama and Poetry of the Golden Age 
Study of the evolution of Spanish verse and theater during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 121: Prose of the Golden Age 
Comprehensive study of the mystic, didactic, fictional, historical, and satirical prose of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, with emphasis on Cervantes and the picaresque novel. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 130: Eighteenth and Nineteenth Century Literature 
Presentation of the major authors in Spanish literature of the 18th and 19th centuries. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 141: Twentieth Century Literature 
An approach to the prose, drama, and poetry of 20th century Spain. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 150: Literature of Spanish America I 
Study of selected authors and works representative of colonial and 19th century Spanish-American literature. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 151: Literature of Spanish America II 
Study of selected authors and works representative of Spanish American literature from the turn of the century to the present. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 160: AFRO Hispanic Literature and Civilization 
Survey of the role and image of black men and women in Spain and Spanish America as interpreted in literature. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 171: Spanish Linguistics 
Introduction to the phonological, morphosyntactic and semantic systems of Spanish. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 172: Spanish Phonology 
Treats the sound system and properties of the Spanish language. Prerequisite SPAN 171. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 177: Introduction to Spanish-English Translation 
Introduces the student to the profession of translation and interpretation and will aim to develop his/her ability to prepare translation from Spanish into English, and to expand the student’s vocabulary in both Spanish and English. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 178: Advanced Spanish-English Translation 
Continuation of training students in translation and interpretation, developing their ability to prepare translation from Spanish into English and to expand the student’s vocabulary in both Spanish and English. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 187: Educational Methods in Foreign Language Teaching 
Introduction to methods, materials, and techniques in foreign language instruction. 
Credits: 
3 

SPAN 190: Independent Study I 
Designed to provide independent study/research under the guidance of a faculty advisor or the equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of Instructor. 

SPAN 191: Independent Study II 
Advanced independent study/research under the guidance of a faculty advisor or the equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of Instructor. 

SPAN 194: Spain and Latin America Through Film 
A study of Spain, Spanish-speaking countries, and Brazil through film, from cultural, sociological and technical points of view. 
Credits: 
3 

Swahili 
SWAH 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
SWAH 001: Swahili I 
This course provides an introduction to the basic language skills (speaking, listening, reading and writing). A proficiency-oriented approach is used in the course. 
Credits: 
3 

SWAH 002: Swahili II 
A continuation of SWAH 001. 
Credits: 
3 

SWAH 003: Swahili III 
An intermediate level course designed to further enhance speaking, listening, reading, and writing in Swahili. Cultural activities are included. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SWAH 002 or equivalent. 

SWAH 004: Swahili IV 
A continuation of SWAH 003. 
Credits: 
3 

SWAH 040: Swahili Intensive Grammar Review 
A core course in the major-minor sequence which includes a thorough review of and practice with major elements of Spanish grammar. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SWAH 004. 

SWAH 050: Swahili Oral Expression I 
A course designed to develop speaking and listening skills through a variety of instructional strategies. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SWAH 004. 

SWAH 052: Swahili Reading and Writing Workshop 
Designed to develop the specific skills of reading and writing in Spanish. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SWAH 004. 

SWAH 190: Swahili Independent Study I 
Designed to provide independent study/research under the guidance of a faculty advisor or the equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of Instructor. 

SWAH 191: Swahili Independent Study II 
Advanced independent study/research under the guidance of a faculty advisor or the equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of Instructor. 

Wolof 
WOLO 
WOLO 001: Wolof I 
This course provides an introduction to the basic language skills (speaking, listening, reading and writing). A proficiency-oriented approach is used in the course. 
Credits: 
3 

WOLO 002: Wolof II 
A continuation of WOLO 001. 
Credits: 
3 

WOLO 003: Wolof III 
An intermediate level course designed to further enhance speaking, listening, reading, and writing in Wolof. Cultural activities are included. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
WOLO 002 or equivalent. 

WOLO 004: Wolof IV 
A continuation of WOLO 003. 
Credits: 
3 

WOLO 190: Wolof Independent Study 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
3 

Anthropology 
ANTH 
ANTH 110: Introduction to Cultural Anthropology 
Provides a background for understanding human nature and an appreciation for cultural diversity. Focuses on the basic concepts of culture and surveys the science and practice of anthropology in relation to contemporary global issues. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 120: Introduction to Biological Anthropology 
Focuses on the nature and scope of biological anthropology, human evolution, genetics, “race”, health, and changing relationships between the environment, culture, and human biology. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 130: Introduction to Archaeology 
Survey course designed to provide an evolutionary perspective on contemporary global cultural patterns showing how transformations, though occurring in the deep past, constitute profound forces in modern global society and in everyday life. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 140: Introduction to Linguistics 
Explores the nature of language, its morphological, phonological, and syntactic structure, and the role of the linguist in the study of language. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 141: Language and Culture 
Focuses on the ethnographic study of language and the interrelationship between language and culture. Language variation is examined in the light of such features as social class, ethnicity, gender, standard and non-standard language, pidgins, and creoles. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 210: Magic, Witchcraft, and Healing 
Analyzes the relationships of magic, witchcraft, religion, and healing and their significance in understanding our own cultures as well as Third World societies and other parts of the world. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 211: Gender Roles and Relations 
Examination of cross-cultural gender roles. Also examines U.S. public policies and laws affecting women, men, and children. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 212: Education and Culture 
Application of anthropological concepts to the analysis of educational processes in different cultures and in the U.S. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 213: Cultural Roots of Environmental Crises 
Explores cultural dimensions of global environmental degradation to identify root causes and viable solutions. Comparison of tribal environmental perceptions and production and consumption patterns with our own; evaluates the roles of population and technology, world hunger and quality of life issues. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 214: Anthropological Theory 
Surveys anthropological theories from a historical perspective. Considers current theoretical issues, debates, and the relationship between theory and practice. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 215: Medical Anthropology 
Considers the patterns of health and disease from a multidisciplinary perspective. The focus in on the diversity of health beliefs and practices, variation in health care systems, contemporary global health concerns and ethical issues. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Introduction to Biological Anthropology, or Introduction to Cultural Anthropology, or permission of instructor. 

ANTH 216: Economic Anthropology 
Comparison of modern economic theory with anthropological analysis of pre-capitalist, non-Western and Third World political economies. Discusses band, tribe, chiefdom, early state, peasant, market, and world economic systems and how these systems interact with social and religious systems at national and/or community levels. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 217: Aging in Cross-Cultural Perspective 
An examination of the ways different cultures regard the aged and the process of aging. Topics include attitudes toward aging, the treatment of the aged, and the social, economic, and political aspects of growing old among men and women in different cultures. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 218: Cultural Ecology 
Reviews the processes of human biocultural adaptation to the world’s various biotopes: tropical, sub-tropical, temperate, island and arctic by means of foraging, agriculture, regional and world trade. Discussions will include environmental description and selective reciprocal relationships between key environmental elements. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 219: Ethnolinguistics 
Students will conduct ethnography of communication focusing on selected topics or events as they relate to speech communities applying participant-observation techniques, interviews, and other methods of field work. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 219: Ethnolinguistics 
Students will conduct ethnography of communication focusing on selected topics or events as they relate to speech communities applying participant-observation techniques, interviews, and other methods of field work. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 220: Biology and Culture 
The course involves a critical evaluation of historical and current anthropological theories concerning human variation and the concept of race. It examines the various approaches to the relationships between human biology and sociocultural structures and behavior. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 221: Human Osteology 
Detailed study of the techniques used in the analysis of skeletal material focusing on identification of age, sex, growth, and repair, pathology, and measurement. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 221: Human Osteology 
Detailed study of the techniques used in the analysis of skeletal material focusing on identification of age, sex, growth, and repair, pathology, and measurement. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 222: Ethnography 
Exploration of the techniques used in recording or describing the culture, customs, beliefs, and values of specific peoples or of individual societies. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 222: Ethnography 
Exploration of the techniques used in recording or describing the culture, customs, beliefs, and values of specific peoples or of individual societies. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 230: Method and Theory in Archaeology 
This course reviews the history, goals, and theoretical approaches used in modern archaeology; discusses field methods in survey and excavation, data recording, dating, material analyses, and the reconstruction of ancient lifeways. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 230: Method and Theory in Archaeology 
This course reviews the history, goals, and theoretical approaches used in modern archaeology; discusses field methods in survey and excavation, data recording, dating, material analyses, and the reconstruction of ancient lifeways. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 249: Urban Anthropology 
This course explores urbanism and the process of urbanization. The focus is on understanding the development and history of cities from prehistoric evidence to an investigation of the patterns and complexities of contemporary urban life. Various theoretical approaches and cross-cultural ethnographic studies help explain the lifeways of people in cities. 
Credits: 
3 

ANTH 250: Applied Anthropology 
The application of anthropological principles to the solution of practical problems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology, Introduction to Biological Anthropology, or Introduction to Archaeology or by permission of instructor. 

ANTH 260: Independent Study 
Pre-approved in-depth study of a specific topic in field of interest. Student needs approval of instructor in order to register. Section 1: Cultural Anthropology .Section 2: Biological Anthropology. Section 3: Archaeology .Section 4: Linguistics 
Credits: 
3 
- 
6 

Classics 
CLAS 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
CLAS 001: Elementary Latin I 
The fundamentals of the language and reading of simple prose, with supplementary reading on Roman civilization. Not open to students who have received admission credit in Latin. 
Credits: 
4 

CLAS 002: Elementary Latin II 
Continuation of 001, with increased emphasis on reading. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
CLAS 001. 

CLAS 003: Intermediate Latin III 
Review of the language and selected readings in prose and poetry. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Two or three units of secondary Latin or CLAS 002. 

CLAS 004: Intermediate Latin IV 
Includes the reading of selections from major authors, usually in poetry. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
three or four units of secondary Latin or CLAS 003. 

CLAS 006: Hieroglyphs I 
Introduction to Middle Egyptian language and writing, including grammar and translation of inscriptions and narratives. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 007: Hieroglyphs II 
Continuation of CLAS 006, with increased emphasis on reading. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 010: Elementary Greek I 
Fundamentals of the language and the reading of simple Attic prose, with supplementary reading on Greek civilization. 
Credits: 
4 

CLAS 011: Elementary Greek II 
Continuation of CLAS 010, with increased emphasis on reading. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
CLAS 010. 

CLAS 012: Intermediate Greek III 
Review of the language and selected readings. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
two or three units of secondary Greek or CLAS 011. 

CLAS 013: Intermediate Greek IV 
Includes the reading of selections from major authors. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Three or four units of secondary Greek or CLAS 012. 

CLAS 014: Introduction to Humanities I 
The first part of a two-semester core course for freshmen, designed to enhance their understanding of great and enduring themes of humanistic inquiry. Students read literary and philosophical works of major historical significance and value from a contemporary viewpoint. Students explore themes such as cultural collision and resolution, concentrating on various aspects of the epic tradition. Satisfies Divisional Studies A requirement. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 015: Introduction to Humanities II 
The second part of a two-semester core course for freshmen. In this course students study the relationship of the self to the other, with all its attendant considerations, and concentrate on generic distinctions between comedy and tragedy in drama, autobiography, and fiction. Satisfies Divisional Studies A requirement. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 016: Ideas in Antiquity 
 This course focuses on the study of various major themes in the study of the ancient world. Consistent with the interests of the instructor, the emphasis will fall on those literary, philosophical, historical, and political texts which are pertinent to an investigation of notions such as gender, the hero, freedom, religion, justice, and so on. Satisfies Divisional Studies A requirement. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 030: Vocabulary Building 
Systematic study of Greek and Latin elements of English words, the history of English words, and principles of word formation. Develops the student.s ability to interpret unfamiliar words in context. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 032: Ancient Medicine 
Systematic study of Greek and Latin elements found in medical terminology, together with the principles of word formation. This etymological aspect is placed within the broader context of the origins and evolution of ancient medicine. Recommended for students who anticipate careers in medicine. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 033: Legal Terminology 
Systematic study of Greek and Latin elements found in modern legal terminology, together with the principles of word formation. Develops the student.s ability to recognize and interpret legal terms in context. Recommended for students who anticipate careers in law or government. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 050: Ancient Egypt & the Near East 
Cultural interactions among societies in the Eastern Mediterranean left lasting contributions to world civilization, from the introduction of cities and writing systems to the emergence of large-scale empires. The course focuses on literature & orality, on ideas & beliefs (particularly the Hebrew Bible), and on art & archaeology. Required for the Interdisciplinary Humanities: Ancient and Modern major; open to non-majors, Division A course. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 051: Greece/Rome 
Covers topics in modern Greek and Roman language, culture, and history. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 079: General Literature Honors 
An intensive study and discussion of classical texts that have been chosen for their significance to the development of what has come to be called western culture. The main objective is to consider particular conceptions of what it means to be human and to consider the place of such conceptions in the development of critical thought. Participation is limited to students in the COAS Honors Program. Division A Course. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 081: Honors Humanities Seminar I 
This course will cover the history of Israel from Biblical through Roman times as a context for the emergence of Christianity. Participation is limited to students in the COAS Honors Program. Division A Course. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 082: Honors Humanities Seminar II. 
An exploration of nature and origins of apocalyptic thinking, beginning with 2nd Temple Jewish and early Christian texts. The second half of the seminar focuses on modern expressions of apocalypticism in religion, politics, literature, film, and popular culture. Participation is limited to students in the COAS Honors Program. Division A Course. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 085: Directed Reading for Sophomore Honors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
1 

CLAS 089: Directed Reading for Junior Honors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
1 

CLAS 090: Honors Social Science Seminar 
Advanced study of topics in Greek and Latin literature, ancient history, ancient philosophy, classical civilization, and/or linguistics, arranged and carried out in cooperation with an instructor. 
Credits: 
1 

CLAS 092: Senior Departmental Honors 
Open to students in the COAS Honors Program. A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 093: Senior Departmental Honors 
Open to students in the COAS Honors Program. A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 101: Greek Literature in Translation 
This course offers a cultural and intellectual history of Ancient Greece through readings of its surviving literature. Students examine some of the major works of Greek literature and the Greek contribution to epic and lyric poetry, tragic and comic drama, historiography, philosophy, and science.  All works are read in English translation. Satisfies Divisional Studies A requirement. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 102: Roman Literature in English 
This course offers a cultural and intellectual history of Ancient Rome through readings of its surviving literature. Students examine some of the major works of Roman literature and the Roman contribution to epic and lyric poetry, tragic and comic drama, historiography, philosophy, and science.  All works are read in English translation. Satisfies Divisional Studies A requirement. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 103: Classical Art 
An introduction to the art and archaeology of the ancient cultures of Greece and Italy. Students first study the development of the Greek art from the Bronze Age to the Hellenistic period. Students then study then examine the artistic, architectural, and engineering achievements of the ancient Romans, from foundation of Rome to the Christian period. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 104: Ancient Mediterranean: Greece, 1200 - 200 BCE 
A survey of ancient Greek culture from the Bronze Age (ca. 2000 bce) to the time of Alexander the great (ca. 300’s bce). The course examines the evolution of Greek society, art, literature, and material culture in the historical context of political and cultural developments. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 105: Roman Civilization 
 An introduction to the history of Rome from the founding (Monarchy) through the period of the Republic and culminating in the establishment of the Empire. Focus on, among other topics, political, social, legal, religious developments mainly through the close reading of primary source materials. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 106: Leadership in the Ancient World 
A study of the problems of leadership and the theoretical solutions as understood by the ancient Greeks and Romans. Develops the students’ ability to judge individual leaders, analyze the benefits and responsibilities of leadership, and become better leaders themselves. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 108: Greek Drama in English 
An introduction to the genre of Greek tragedy, taught in translation. The course examines the origins and performance context of tragedy, in addition to the particular styles and dramatic techniques of the three major tragedians Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 109: Classical Mythology 
A study of the origins and development of Greek and Roman mythology, heroic legend, and folktale. Myths are studied within the context of ancient culture, considering such issues as their relation to foreign material, as well as their ability to convey cultural ideals, power structures, class hierarchies, political ideologies, religious beliefs, etc. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 110: Blacks in Antiquity 
This course explores the importance of Africa in the Greco-Roman world, in particular Africa's economic, intellectual, political, and artistic contributions to the ancient world. The course also examines ancient attitudes toward race and considers famous Africans of antiquity. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 111: Satire and Comedy 
An introduction to the various forms of humor that existed in the ancient Mediterranean world, in particular Greek comedic performance and Roman satirical writing. Texts are studied in translation, as a way to examine ancient theories of humor, entertainment, and social commentary. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 112: Law and Politics in the Ancient World 
This course studies various topics related to law, politics, and rhetoric in the Ancient world. Satisfies Divisional Studies B requirement. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 113: Women in the Ancient World 
An examination of the cultural constructions of women and men and the ideologies of gender difference that determined the way men and women of ancient Greece and Rome thought about themselves and each other. The course considers the difference between ideology and “daily life” by juxtaposing what can be known of historical reality with conceptualizations in selected surviving texts. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 114: Love in Antiquity 
Theoretical and historical analysis of seminal prose and poetic texts on love from the ancient Mediterranean world with emphasis on recurring themes and motifs in erotic texts from antiquity through modernity. Satisfies Divisional A requirement. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 115: Slavery in the Ancient World 
An introduction to the theory and practice of slavery in antiquity with the main focus on the institution of slavery in Rome. The topic will be examined via diverse texts and disciplines; e.g., religion, law, literature, philosophy. Also an examination of the impact and connections of ancient slavery to the institution in the New World. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 118: Directed Readings 
A program of reading, discussion and examination on a specific area of study chosen with an appropriate faculty advisor. This course cannot be repeated for credit with a different topic. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 132: Introduction to Greek Tragedy 
Gods and heroes, fate and free choice, gender conflict, the justice or injustice of the universe: these are just some of the fundamental human issues that we will explore in about ten of the tragedies of Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 133: Introduction to Homer 
Reading and translation of extensive selections from the Odyssey. Introduction to epic meter, to Homeric Greek, and to the poet's style. Consideration of evidences of oral composition and discussion of the heroic tradition. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 134: Introduction to Plato 
A historical introduction to Western civilization's philosophical heritage from Plato to contemporary philosophical movements. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 137-138: Special Topics in Greek 
A supervised course of study on a Greek text or broader topic, designed in coordination with an appropriate faculty advisor. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 144: Catullus and Horace 
Careful reading and concentrated study of selected poems by Catullus and Horace in Latin. Discussion will be supplemented with additional readings in English translation and secondary scholarship. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 145: Lucretius and Cicero 
Close reading and study of selections from the works of Cicero and Lucretius. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 146: Vergil, I 
Close reading of extended selections from Virgil in Latin, primarily drawn from the Aeneid, supplemented with additional readings in English translation and secondary scholarship. Emphasis on Virgil’s poetic technique as well as the political and cultural significance of his poetry. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 147: Vergil, II 
Close reading of extended selections from Virgil in Latin, primarily drawn from the Aeneid, supplemented with additional readings in English translation and secondary scholarship. Emphasis on Virgil’s poetic technique as well as the political and cultural significance of his poetry. (Continuation of CLAS 147) 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 148: Roman Historians: Latin 
A supervised course of study on Roman historiography and the specific works of the major Roman historians, designed in coordination with an appropriate faculty advisor. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 152: Latin Prose Composition 
Solidifies the student’s knowledge of Latin syntax and style through intensive practice in writing Latin. Composition exercises are performed in tandem with selections from the prose masters, notably Caesar and Cicero. Open to students who have completed Latin 001-004 or equivalent. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 153: Special Topics in Latin I 
A supervised course of study on a Latin text or broader topic, designed in coordination with an appropriate faculty advisor. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 154: Special Topics in Latin II 
A supervised course of study on a Latin text or broader topic, designed in coordination with an appropriate faculty advisor. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 157: Directed Readings in Latin 
A supervised course of study on a Latin text or texts, designed in coordination with an appropriate faculty advisor. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 157-160: Directed Readings in Latin 
A supervised course of study on a Latin text or texts, designed in coordination with an appropriate faculty advisor. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 167: Internship 
A course designed to provide students the opportunity to participate in an internship approved by the department. Designed in coordination with an appropriate faculty advisor. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 168: Internship 
A course designed to provide students the opportunity to participate in an internship approved by the department. Designed in coordination with an appropriate faculty advisor. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 170: Senior Seminar 
Senior seminar for foreign language majors with concentration in non-European / less-commonly taught languages. 
Credits: 
1 

CLAS 171: Ancient Law and Rhetoric - WRTG 
A supervised course of study on a classical text or texts (read in translation), designed in coordination with an appropriate faculty advisor. 
Credits: 
1 

CLAS 702: Politics and the Past (Writing) 
A study the intersection of history with political identity, focusing fifth century Athenian society, which defined itself through myth, assertions of what Athenians are not (difference), and what Athenians are (sameness). 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 703: Structure of Ancient Thought (Writing) 
This course offers an examination of various topics in the history and structure of ideas (historical, philosophical, religious) in the Ancient World. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 704: Plato’s Republic (Writing) 
This course offers a detailed examination of Plato's Republic. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 705: Cleopatra: Ancient Realities and Modern Perceptions (Writing) 
This course combines the methodologies of history, gender studies, and classical reception to contextualize Cleopatra into the history of her own times as well as to examine her legacy as a female and racialist signifier in subsequent eras. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 707: Introduction to Aristotle (Writing) 
This course offers a general introduction to the philosophy and thought of Aristotle. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 708: Greek Drama in English (Writing) 
This course will analyze ancient plays both as great works of literature and as artifacts of a particular artistic, cultural, and political context. Students will read excerpts and complete plays in English from a variety of ancient authors, including (from Classical Athens) Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, Aristophanes, and Menander, and (from late Republican and early Imperial Rome) Plautus, Terence, and Seneca. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 710: Classical Heritage (Writing) 
Students taking this course will be assigned a research paper and will be held to a higher standard in the assessment of their contributions to class translation and discussion and their performance on exams. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 711: Stoics and Epicureans (Writing) 
This course is focused on the study of Hellenistic Philosophy, primarily that of the Stoics and Epicureans, though ancient Skepticism will also be covered. This material forms some of the background essential to later developments, including the philosophical religions of the Roman Empire, Christianity, and Neoplatonism (both Christian, Arab, and Jewish). 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 713: Classical Mythology (Writing) 
A study of classical mythology through examination of the literary mythical narratives of Greece and Rome. We will consider the form, content, and themes of these stories in order to explore the cultural significance of myth and the various ways in which myths can be interpreted through writing assignments. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 714: Leadership in the Ancient World (Writing) 
Designed to introduce students to methods of studying leadership both within the field of Classical Studies and without. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 718: Comparative Mythology (Writing) 
A comparative study of the ancient myths and traditions of the Sumerians, Babylonians, Hebrews, Greeks, Indians, and Romans. The course examines myths of human origins, social relationships, and conceptions of heroism. 
Credits: 
3 

CLAS 722: Satire and Comedy (Writing) 
An introduction to the various forms of humor that existed in the ancient Mediterranean world, in particular Greek comedic performance and Roman satirical writing. Texts are studied in translation, as a way to examine ancient theories of humor, entertainment, and social commentary. 
Credits: 
3 

Comprehensive Sciences 
COMP 
COMP 001: Life Sciences Lecture-Laboratory 
This course explores the basic concepts of the biological (life) sciences.  These concepts will be presented through the examination of the principal characteristics that all living things (bacteria, protozoa, fungi, plants, animals) have in common (i.e., ecology, genetics, taxonomy, metabolism, evolution, reproduction and development, etc.). The lecture information surveys living systems on the chemical, cellular and organismal levels.  The exploration is complemented by key laboratory applications and observations that will enable the students to recognize, comprehend and appreciate the complexities of biological organization that exist in nature. 
Credits: 
3 

COMP 002: Planetary Science Lecture-Laboratory 
The planetary science course involves studies of astronomy (planets, stars, the universe) and geology (the earth).  In geology, the principal features of planet earth such as size, shape, composition, motions are presented.  How planet earth changes as a result of internal and external forces acting on it provides a topic of interest.  In astronomy, emphasis is on the other planets, the solar system and other celestial bodies that exist in the universe. Laboratory investigations involve the examination of various samples, planetarium visits and field trips to area geological sites and venues where  technologically advanced telescopes can be used. 
Credits: 
3 

COMP 003: Physical Science Lecture-Laboratory 
The basic principles of chemistry and of physics are covered in the course.  Emphasis is placed on understanding these concepts and how they can be used to relate to every day phenomena.  The inorganic and organic aspects of matter, the laws that govern their actions and the formulas that predict the activities of molecules comprise some of the information on basic concepts in chemistry. The laws of physics that govern the solid, liquid and gaseous states of matter are explored. Lecture topics include the foundations of science, principles/concepts/laws of motion, heat and temperature, energy, sound, light, atomic structure, organic and inorganic chemistry. Laboratory exercises include laboratory safety, measurements, law of pendulum, spectrophotometry, identification and physical property determination of substances and empirical formula determination of compounds. 
Credits: 
3 

COMP 004: Computers and Society 
Computers and Society is an introductory course in computer science.  Course activities include lectures, laboratory sessions, and discussions.  Lecture material will cover vocabulary, applications, implications, communications and networks, history, and the future directions of computers.  Assigned reading will be on the computer's impact on numerous aspects of society.  Current events and popular computer topics such as the digital divide, privacy, identity theft and viruses will be presented.  Students will explore and discuss how these and other topics affect their lives specifically and society overall. 
Credits: 
3 

Health, Human Perform. & Leisure Studies 
HHPL 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
HHPL 002: Beginning Swimming 
Designed to teach individuals to swim, including such basic skills to make them safe in deep water as floating in a prone position as well as supine position, breath control, and rhythmic breathing. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 003: Advanced Beginning Swimming 
Increases the skill of the individual by adding to skills learned in the beginner’s course and prepares the student for additional water safety training by introducing skills that improve stamina and basic coordination. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 004: Intermediate Swimming 
Provides the student the opportunity to learn the elements of good swimming. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 005: Golf 
This activity course provides the student with the opportunity to learn and develop the basic rules and skills of golf. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 007: Volleyball 
Designed to develop a thorough knowledge of volleyball skills, rules, and procedures; embodies individual skills and team skills. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 009: Slimnastics 
Develops proper body alignment producing improved motor mechanics, poise and elasticity of movement. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 010: Soccer 
This activity course provides the student with the opportunity to learn and develop the basic rules and skills of soccer. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 011: Weight Training 
This activity course provides the student with the opportunity to learn and develop the basic rules and skills of Weight Training. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 013: Slimnastics II 
An Aerobics exercise course incorporating a variety of exercises that stimulate heart and lung activity for a time period to produce beneficial changes in the body - running, walking, swimming, rope jumping, jogging, etc. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 014: Elementary Judo 
Develops the fundamental abilities required in all aspects of Judo training including the technical, physical, and mental components. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 016: Elementary Tae Kwon Do 
Develops the fundamental techniques and abilities required in all aspects of Tae Kwon Do including the technical, physical, and mental components. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 017: Intermediate-Advanced Tae Kwon Do 
Designed to further develop the techniques in all aspects of Tae Kwon Do on an advanced level. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
PHED 016 

HHPL 020: Brazilian Jiujitsu 
This activity course provides the student with the opportunity to learn and develop the basic rules and skills of Brazilian jiujitsu. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 021: Badminton 
Provides the student with the basic knowledge, understanding, and skill necessary as a life time activity. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 030: Athletic Coaching 
Causes the student to move a dependent role in sports and athletics to a leadership role as a coach or game official. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 034: Restrictive Activity 
Physical activity course specific for students with special needs. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 035: Restrictive Activity II 
Continuation of HHPL 034. Physical activity course specific for students with special needs. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 037: Restrictive Activity III 
Continuation of HHPL 035. Physical activity course specific for students with special needs. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 038: Restrictive Acitivity IV 
Continuation of HHPL 037. Physical activity course specific for students with special needs. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 039: Badminton II 
This course is designed to build upon the basic fundamental skills of the game. It provides opportunity for skill refinement, analyzation and competitive preparation. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 048: Exercise and Wellness 
This courses introduces the student to the fundamental relationship between physical fitness and a healthy lifestyle. The theoretical components of fitness, principles of training, individual pre/post assessments and prescription exercise programs are examined. Varied physical activity media are introduced to give the student practical experiences with the ultimate goal of self-directed lifetime wellness. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 050: Methods of Teaching Team Sports I 
Designed for major students to teach methods and techniques of team sports. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 052: Methods of Teaching Individual Sports 
This class is designed to prepare the student to teach individual sports. The student will learn various means of organizing a class for particular sports, developing teaching procedures, analyzing movement patterns and evaluating student performance. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 054: Fitness I 
This course is designed to develop a thorough knowledge of fitness which includes measurements and evaluation of one’s present state of physical fitness, variables affecting physical fitness and plan and follow a lifelong individualized program. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 057: Aerobic Dance Fitness 
Works on flexibility, strength, but mainly on the cardiovascular system. Knowledge about health and fitness given. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 058: Water Aerobics 
This activity course provides the student with the opportunity to learn and develop the basic rules and skills of water aerobics. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 061: Pilates 
This activity course provides the student with the opportunity to learn and develop the basic rules and skills of pilates. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 062: Zumba 
This activity course provides the student with the opportunity to learn and develop the basic rules and skills of Zumba. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 102: Human Anatomy (Majors only) 
Concerns the fundamental understanding of the body’s basic anatomical functions and structure. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 103: Human Physiology 
Designed for major students, the course is concerned with the fundamental understanding of the body’s basic physiologic mechanism. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 104: Kinesiology 
Teaches fundamental principles, mechanics, balance, and muscular action that are basic to the analysis of movement, sports, and individual activities. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PHED 102 and PHED 103. 

HHPL 106: Disease Prevention and Health Promotion 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 107: Exercise Physiology I 
Outlines the physiological bases of physical recreation and the place of exercise in the development of strength, speed, skill, and endurance. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PHED 102, PHED 103, and PHED 104. 

HHPL 108: Human Anatomy Laboratory 
Designed to give the student an opportunity to work in the laboratory to study prosected cadavers, models and illustrative charts. Permission needed for enrollment. See instructor. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 109: Methods and Directive Teaching in Physical Education 
Designed for students who are interested in teaching secondary physical education. This course will assist the beginning teacher to improve teaching methodology and techniques in various activities. Emphasis is also placed upon curriculum content, construction of daily lesson plans and course objectives based upon a systematic approach to learning. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 111: Motor Learning and Skill Performance 
Teaches fundamentals and principles of movement methods and motor skills. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 112: First Aid &CPR (Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation) 
The general purpose of the first aid training provided by the content of the Standard First Aid course and the CPR course is to teach the knowledge and skills that are needed for the emergency care of the injured until a physician arrives and to create an active interest in the prevention of accidents through the elimination of their causes. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 113: Adaptive Physical Education 
Acquaints students with organization and development of programs for the atypical student. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 118: Athletic Training I 
An intensive introductory course on athletic injury care and prevention. Primarily focused toward the immediate assessment and treatment of the person and the person’s injury. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 123: Res & Stat-Sprt Med Pre-Med 
This course is a study of the research process and its applications to sports medicine. Emphasis will be given to the components of scientific research and a scientific research proposal. Evaluation and interpretation of current research reports and manuscripts in the field of sports medicine will also be covered 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 125: Independent Study. 
Major students during their senior year conduct research or seek to expand knowledge in a specific subject area with the guidance of an adviser. 
Credits: 
1 
- 
3 

HHPL 130: Exercise Physiology II - Neuromuscular Aspects 
Designed to enable the student to develop a working knowledge of the neuromuscular aspects of exercise physiology. The effects of exercise on the structure and function of the neuromuscular system will be studied in detail in this course. The effects of ergogenic aids such as anabolic steroids on muscular strength will be studied. Nutrition for human performance and energy transfer in exercise will be investigated. The relative merits of isokinetic, isometric and isotonic strength training will also be examined. Upon completion of the course the student should have the ability to assess muscular strength and endurance, and then be able to prescribe individualized exercise programs for building muscular strength and endurance. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 135: Sports Psychology 
Involves the examination of human behavior in the sports setting. Covers skill learning and performance common to both physical education and sport; the psychological factors affecting the learning and performance of physical skills and how individuals are affected by both internal and external factors. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 139: Fitness Assessment and Exercise Prescription Practicum 
Designed to enable the student to gain practical exposure to the many facets of fitness assessment and exercise prescription. The course will be based on guidelines for exercise testing and prescription recommended by the American College of Sports Medicine. Students will be exposed to and/or participate in the administration of the following: exercise stress tests, EKG’s, blood pressure screening, step test, muscular strength and endurance assessment, flexibility testing and other tests which are used to assess fitness. Students will prescribe, conduct and participate in fitness programs designed to elicit both aerobic and muscular training effects. Each student will be required to demonstrate a working knowledge of the “FITSCAN” computer program for assessing fitness and prescribing exercise. To fulfill the practicum requirement of the course, students will work in a center which deals with some aspect of the fitness industry. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 140: Human Growth and Development 
Provides a study of the biological, psychological, and social factors which influence the growth and development of the individual. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 141: Intro to Sports Management 
The purpose of this class is to provide an overview of the sport industry that introduces the student to the basic fundamental knowledge and skill sets required of the sport manager to solve sport business problems. Focus will also be placed on understanding career options in the sport industry and preparing for employment. Identifies necessary competencies for Sport managers. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 144: Sports Law 
An analysis of the legal process and governing organizations within the sport enterprise. Preparation for dealing with the legal ramifications and the governance organizations of the sporting world. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 145: Sports Marketing 
This course provides an understanding of sports and the marketing of events and products, and creates a moral practice and standard when targeting a product or population. Theory identification and practical involvement will be merged to enhance the experience and opportunity to contribute into the multi-billion dollar sports industry. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 147: Sports and the Media 
Introduction to theory and practice of media forums and their relationship to the sports industry. Designed to give students an operational and technical foundation in research, print, broadcasting, and the impact of advertising and sales on production of a sports event. Guest lecturers from professional media entities, and opportunity for hands-on experiences. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 148: Sports Governance 
An analysis of the legal process and governing organizations within the sport enterprise. Preparation for dealing with the legal ramifications and the governance organizations of the sporting world. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 149: Facilities and Event Management 
Course addresses the fundamentals of planning and design, emphasizing athletic, physical education, and recreation facilities in both rural and urban settings. Field trips and current trends in facility design and scheduling will also be explored. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 150: Management and Leadership in Sports 
This  course focuses on the leadership principles for directing programs and facilities in sport management. This course is an analysis of effective management strategies and the body of knowledge associated with pursuing a career in sport management. The course will introduce students to sport management career opportunities in the sport industry, and it encourages students to see sport principles as they apply to management, leadership style, communication, and motivation. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 151: Sports Management Internship 
 An internship is an intensive career oriented work experience related to the student’s academic studies, professional and educational goals. It is also an opportunity to gain practical experience in one’s major field of study, apply knowledge gained in the classroom, and make useful contacts in a professional field. The experience is ideally unique to the student and must be supervised by a qualified supervisor. 
Credits: 
6 

HHPL 152: Methods and Materials of Health Education 
Offers information on theory, methods and materials used in health instruction in the secondary school and provides for practical classroom experience. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 153: Human Sexuality 
Develops a functional graded vocabulary, a knowledge of key facts and basic concepts, wholesome attitudes and practices, and skill in the critical analysis of basic problems and issues as they relate to human sexuality. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 157: Health Problems of Children and Youth 
Concerns the health needs of the child while at school; the responsibility of the teacher, physician, nurse and administrator. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 159: Health Science 
Promotes healthier living through scientific knowledge in health, disease, mental and emotional functioning, chemical alteration and behavior, environmental health and family living. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 160: Women’s Health 
Deals with the physical and mental health of women. An examination of the physician-patient relationship, gynecological exams, vaginal infections, menstruation, cancer, marriage, rape, abortion, etc. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 162: Men's Health 
This course explores the societal, economic, cultural, and gender influences that shape men’s health beliefs and practices. Common health problems and strategies effective in promoting men’s health and well-being are explored 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 163: Foundation of Health Promotion 
 This is an introductory course that provides students with a scientific background into the scope of professional practice and the sub-disciplines in public, community, and personal health promotion and education 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 165: Health of Women, Children and Families 
This course examines the policies, programs and services that focus on the health of women, families and children. It explores major issues facing children, women and families by critically examining the assumptions, values, and philosophical perspectives. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 175: Controlling Stress &Tension 
The Management of Stress and Tension explores a holistic (body, mind, emotions, and spirit) approach to the management of stress and tension. From a theoretical perspective, students will analyze stressors, the stress response, resiliency, coping, lifestyle, and relaxation techniques. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 179: Community Health Internship – Majors Only 
A field-based field placement designed to offer students a "hands-on" structured work experience in the diverse field of community health. 
Credits: 
9 

HHPL 182: Sports Medicine Honors for Sophomores 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 183: Sports Medicine Honors for Sophomores 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 184: Sports Medicine Honors for Juniors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 185: Field Work A – Health Education Majors 
Practical, supervised training designed to supplement formal study. Students learn practical applications of classroom material and gain skills and knowledge relevant to their course of study. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 186: Field Work B – Health Education Majors 
Practical, supervised training designed to supplement formal study. Students learn practical applications of classroom material and gain skills and knowledge relevant to their course of study. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 187: Field Work C – Health Education Majors 
Practical, supervised training designed to supplement formal study. Students learn practical applications of classroom material and gain skills and knowledge relevant to their course of study. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 188: Sports Medicine Honors for Seniors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 192: Direct Readings Honors for Juniors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 193: Direct Readings Honors for Sophomores 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 194: Direct Rdgs Hnrs for Seniors 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 195: Direct Rdgs Hnrs for Jrs 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
1 

HHPL 220: Organization and Administration of HPER 
Designed to teach students the fundamentals of organization and administration in the delivery of physical education, school health and leisure services. Course covers topics such as leadership, communications, effective management and marketing. Time is also devoted to budget/fiscal practices, policy making, personnel management and training. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 221: Budget & Finance in Sport 
Analysis of budgeting, financial summaries, fiscal management policies and procedures, proposal writing, and taxation for recreation. The student will be exposed to purchasing, recreation debt administration, and to a brief introduction of the use of electronic data processing and financial management. Also covered are basic philosophy in principles, procedures and other aspects of administration. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 280: Sociology of Leisure 
An examination of the implications of the social organization and the role of individuals and groups on leisure environments. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 706: History &Philosophy of PE (Writing) 
This course is an examination of  human movement including historical, philosophical, psychological and physiological components essential to the study of physical education. Demonstrating advanced writing skills is an integral part of this upper level course. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 717: Role of Sport in Society 
This course involves a discussion of the impact of sports in society and the values we place on sports. The course will explore the values, virtues, consequences, rights and responsibilities of sports in our culture. The course is designed to improve the understanding of legal, racial, academic and moral issues of sports and athletics. 
Credits: 
3 

HHPL 746: Ethics/Social Issues of Sport 
An examination of the role of sport in society as a vehicle for values and the ethical digressions that have created a negative perception of sport that permeates at all levels. This course is designed to challenge the student to explore their own ethical values and moral code as they learn the various ethical theories. 
Credits: 
3 

Honors 
HNRS 
HNRS 080, 081, 082, 083: Honors Humanities Seminar 
Seminars on selected topics in the humanities for sophomores and juniors. 
Credits: 
3 

HNRS 084, 085, 086, 087: Honors Natural Science Seminar 
Seminars on selected topics in the natural sciences for sophomores and juniors. 
Credits: 
3 

HNRS 088, 089, 090, 091: Honors Social Science Seminar 
Seminars on selected topics in the social sciences for sophomores and juniors. 
Credits: 
3 

HNRS 093: Honors Research Methods 
Junior Honors course emphasizing all aspects of research including design of experiments, analysis and presentation of data, proposal writing, and preparation of journal articles. Intended to prepare students for writing the Senior Thesis. 
Credits: 
3 

HNRS 700: Honors Writing Intensive 
Intermediate writing class offered in one of the disciplines: Natural Sciences, Social Sciences or Humanities. Satisfies additional writing requirement. 
Credits: 
3 

Humanities 
HUMN 
HUMA 101: Literature in Revolution 
This course explores the various ways in which selected contemporary authors from literary traditions have represented the environment and imagined the relationship of human beings to nonhuman nature. The course will focus on works by authors from various cultural, racial, and ethnic backgrounds.  Genres will include poetry, prose fiction, essay, and film. 
Credits: 
3 

HUMA 107: Women in Literature 
This course is an introduction to representative works by and about women from historical, social, and literary perspectives.  By the end of the course, students should be able to demonstrate knowledge of the texts, the authors and literary and social movements that produced them, and how women's views of themselves and their community are reflected in their writing. 
Credits: 
3 

HUMA 111: Classic Films in English 
Acquaints students with classic works of American cinema, the historical eras they depict, and their importance in the history of film. 
Credits: 
3 

HUMN 011: Literature of the Ancient World 
Introduction to the literature of ancient Greece and Rome and the Near East, concentrating on literary styles and cultural background of the ancient world. 
Credits: 
3 

HUMN 012: Medieval and Renaissance Literature 
Introduction to the literature of the European medieval and Renaissance cultures through a reading of selected authors who express important concepts and cultural attitudes of the two periods. 
Credits: 
3 

HUMN 013: Literature of the Modern World 
Introduction to the literature of the post-Renaissance world, emphasizing both the history and development of ideas during the period and the literary methods and values of the works studied. 
Credits: 
3 

HUMN 014: Introduction to Humanities I 
Introduction to Humanities I is the first part of a two-semester core course for freshmen designed to enhance their understanding of great and enduring themes of humanistic inquiry. Students read literary and philosophical works of major historical significance and value from a contemporary viewpoint. Students explore themes such as cultural collision and resolution, concentrating on various aspects of the epic tradition. 
Credits: 
3 

HUMN 015: Introduction to Humanities II 
Introduction to Humanities II is the second part of a two-semester core course for freshmen. In this course students study the relationship of the self to the other, with all its attendant considerations, and concentrate on generic distinctions between comedy and tragedy in drama, autobiography, and fiction. Prerequisite is Humanities I. 
Credits: 
3 

HUMN 107: Introduction to Women’s Studies 
Introduction to the role of women in the humanities, investigating women as writers and their contributions to the disciplines of philosophy, German, Russian, Classics, English, and the Romance Languages. Cross-listed with other departments in the Division of the Humanities. 
Credits: 
3 

College of Nursing & Allied Health Sciences 
The College of Nursing and Allied Health Sciences will be comprised of top-ranked educational programs that prepare healthcare professionals to be leaders and innovators in practice, education, research, and service. Graduates will deliver patient-centered, interprofessional care, and utilize cutting-edge technology and evidence-based practice to improve the health of all people with an emphasis on promoting health equity toward eliminating health disparities. 
The mission of the College of Nursing and Allied Health Sciences is to provide exemplary educational experiences within the health professions to an ethnically diverse population of students with high scholarship and leadership potential. Emphasis is placed on the University’s historical commitment to provide educational opportunities to Black students and other underserved minority groups. The College fosters the development of competent, ethical, and compassionate graduates endowed with a strong sense of the University’s core values of excellence, leadership, truth, and service. As scholars and leaders, graduates are empowered to address issues of social justice and inequities in health care in the United States and the global community, inclusive of the underserved. The College is committed to recruiting and retaining a cadre of qualified and competent faculty and staff dedicated to teaching, research, professional practice, and service. 
 
DIVISIONS & DEPARTMENTS 
CLINCAL LAB SCIENCE 
HEALTH MANAGEMENT 
NURSING 
NUTRITIONAL SCIENCES 
OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY 
PHYSICAL THERAPY 
 
UNDERGRADUATE MAJORS, PROGRAMS, & CONCENTRATIONS 
Clinical Laboratory Science 
Health Management 
Nursing 
Nutritional Sciences 
Radiation Therapy 
 
 
 
 
Elective - HLMN (3crs): Elective (Courses under subject code HLMN) 
Credits: 
3 
- 
0 

Clinical Laboratory Sciences 
CLLS 
Clinical laboratory scientists provide rapid access to laboratory test results that are critical for the diagnostic and treatment decisions necessary for the delivery of quality healthcare. A degree in Clinical Laboratory Science prepares graduates for employment opportunities in clinical, veterinary, and forensic laboratories; biotechnology and pharmaceutical industries; management, marketing, and biomedical sales. Clinical Laboratory Scientists (Medical Technologists), including graduates of Howard University, are employed nationally in the following settings: 
• 
Hospital Laboratories 

• 
Physician Office Laboratories 

• 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 

• 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 

• 
Public Health Laboratories 

• 
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) 

• 
The Red Cross 

• 
Bioterrorism Laboratories 

• 
Traveling Technologists 


Clinical Laboratory Science is also an excellent alternative to degrees in biology and chemistry for those students who plan to pursue post-graduate studies in Medicine, Dentistry, Biomedical Sciences or Public Health. 
The program at Howard University is a fully accredited (NAACLS) four year BS degree program. The curriculum includes science and general education courses in Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics, English, and the Social /Behavioral Sciences taken at the freshman and sophomore level. These courses can be also transferred from accredited universities or community colleges.  
Specialized Clinical Laboratory Science courses taken during the program are taught by experienced nationally certified faculty. In the final year of the program, students complete their clinical practicums at accredited clinical laboratories in the Washington, DC – Metropolitan area. Graduates of the program are eligible to sit for national certification examinations. Department of Clinical Laboratory Science Goals: 
• 
Provide an educational experience of the highest standard in clinical laboratory science 

• 
Prepare highly skilled laboratory scientists who are committed to lifelong learning and eminently capable of contributing to the delivery of quality health care 

• 
Instill values of professional responsibility, ethical conduct and compassionate concern for those we serve. 


Accreditation 
The Clinical Laboratory Sciences Program is accredited by the National Accrediting Agency for Clinical Laboratory Sciences (NAACLS), 5600 N. River Road, Suite 720, Rosemont , IL 60018-5119, 847.939.3597, www.naacls.org. 
CLLS 101: Introduction to Clinical Laboratory Science 
History, organizations, educational and occupational opportunities, and ethics of clinical Laboratory science. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
NONE 

CLLS 300: Basic Clinical Lab Techniques 
dits Introduces students to laboratory techniques used in the various areas of the clinical laboratory. The course will expose students to the basic techniques, principles and practices used in clinical and research laboratories. Students will develop an appreciation of the impact of laboratory skills in achieving accurate and precision on the final outcome of laboratory results. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
NONE 

CLLS 303: Clinical Hematology I 
Lectures and simulated laboratory course designed to provide information on the basic hematology concepts, and current hematology laboratory techniques and procedures. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 220 AND PHYSIOLOGY – MINIMUM GRADE OF ‘C’. 

CLLS 305: Clinical Biochemistry &Instrumentation 
Lecture and laboratory course focused on human biochemistry, basic physics concepts and operation of laboratory instrumentation. Students will learn to diagnose simple instrument malfunctions and the rationale for troubleshooting. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
A GRADE OF C OR ABOVE IN PHYSIOLOGY, GENETICS &BIOL 220. 

CLLS 307: Clinical Immunology I 
Lectures and laboratory course on theory, principles, and procedures of immunology. The course will provide students with the knowledge and principles of immunology, the application of these principles to diagnostic immunology, and exposure to current developments in the field (Formerly CLLS 709). 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
BIOL 220 AND PHYSIOLOGY – MINIMUM GRADE OF ‘C’. 

CLLS 308: Clinical Diagnostic Microbiology I 
Lectures and simulated laboratory with emphasis on the general characteristics and procedures for identification of the various groups of bacteria of medical significance. 
Credits: 
5 
Prerequisites: 
A GRADE OF ‘C’ OR ABOVE IN BIOL 220. 

CLLS 309: Clinical Biochem & Instr. 
Lectures and student laboratory course focused on biochemistry profile of disease and the laboratory analytical findings in blood and other body fluids. 
Credits: 
4 

CLLS 310: Clinical Chemistry II 
Lectures and student laboratory course focused on biochemistry profile of disease and the laboratory analytical findings in blood and other body fluids. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
A GRADE OF C OR ABOVE IN CLLS 305. 

CLLS 312: OSHA Seminar 
Course designed to increase Occupational Safety and health standards; includes overview of OSHA and hazard - specific awareness 
Credits: 
1 

CLLS 321: Junior Recitation 
Opportunities for students to engage in small groups 
Credits: 
0 

CLLS 400: Molecular Diagnostics 
Course focused on advance laboratory techniques used in research and other areas of the clinical laboratory. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
NONE 

CLLS 403: Clinical Hematology II 
Lectures and laboratory in hematological blood diseases, hemostasis and leukemia cytochemistry. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
A GRADE OF C OR ABOVE IN CLLS 303. 

CLLS 404: Hematology/Urinalysis Practicum 
Clinical laboratory experience in hematology and urinalysis to increase proficiency in performance of procedures; learn routine, special and automated procedures and for exposure to patient/technologist relationships. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
A grade of C or above in CLLS 303 and 403. 

CLLS 406: Microbiology Practicum 
Clinical laboratory experience in microbiology laboratory to increase proficiency in performance of procedure; learn routine, special and automated procedures and for exposure to patient/technologist relationships. laboratory. 
Credits: 
5 
Prerequisites: 
A GRADE OF C OR ABOVE IN CLLS 308 AND 416. 

CLLS 408: Chemistry Practicum 
Clinical laboratory experience in the chemistry laboratory to increase proficiency in the performance of procedures; learn routine, special and automated procedures and for exposure to patient/technologist relationships. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
A GRADE OF C OR BETTER IN CLLS 305 AND CLLS 310. 

CLLS 409: Immunohematology 
Lectures and student laboratory sessions on advanced immunological studies and transfusion medicine including blood grouping, blood transfusion, leukocyte antigen typing, hepatitis associated antigens, and blood components. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
A GRADE OF C OR ABOVE IN CLLS 307 (Formerly CLLS 709). 

CLLS 411: Immunohematology Practicum 
Clinical laboratory experiences in Blood Banking and Transfusion laboratory to increase proficiency in performance of procedures, to learn routine, special and automated procedures and for exposure to patient/technologist relationships. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
A GRADE OF C OR ABOVE IN CLLS 307 (Formerly CLLS 709) and CLLS 409. 

CLLS 415: Clinical Urinalysis and Body Fluids 
Lectures and laboratory course designed to give theoretical knowledge, and technical skills needed for the analysis of non-blood body fluids such as urine, spinal fluid, etc. and laboratory detection methods used in evaluating renal function and other diseases. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PHYSIOLOGY - MINIMUM GRADE OF ‘C’. 

CLLS 416: Clinical Diagnostic Microbiology II 
Lectures and simulated laboratory course with emphasis on the examination of clinical specimens; the isolation and the identification of organisms commonly encountered in humans. 
Credits: 
5 
Prerequisites: 
A GRADE OF C OR ABOVE IN CLLS 308. 

CLLS 418: Clinical Laboratory Management Decision Making 
Lectures and simulated practices designed to provide principles, theory and procedures of clinical management with emphasis on evaluation of people, equipment, procedures and personnel relationships. This course uses the case study approach, interaction with industry personnel, medical information and laboratory data to aid in understanding patient diagnosis and disease. 
Credits: 
2 

CLLS 423: Senior Recitation 
Students plans and carry out learning activities under the guidance of an instructor.  Students work independently. 
Credits: 
0 

CLLS 720: Research - WRTG 
This course is intended to teach clinical laboratory science students the principles of research, research methodologies, design and statistical methods. This course will equipped students with the principles of scientific research. Scientific writing and other writing assignments are integrated into this course. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
A GRADE OF C OR ABOVE IN ENGL 003 

Health Management Sciences Program 
HLMN 
The Health Management Sciences Program is located in the Department of Health Sciences and Management of the Division of Allied Health Sciences, College of Nursing and Allied Health Sciences, Howard University. The program offers the Bachelor of Sciences in Health Science, which is designed to prepare students to perform management roles and achieve lifelong career in a wide variety of organizations that deliver health care services, as well as pursue graduate education nationally and internationally. 
Certification 
The Howard University Health Management Sciences Program has full certification and is a full member of the American University Programs in Health Administration (AUPHA). AUPHA is a non-profit organization that accredits and certifies Health Administration Programs located in Schools of Allied Health Sciences and the United States. 
Internship 
Students enrolled in the Health Management Sciences Program are expected to complete at least one required semester of internship in an appropriate health care setting. The current required three (3) credit hours of 120 internship clock hours per semester for internship for students enrolled effective Fall 2012 will continue. Additional three (3) credit hours of 120 internship clock hours for subsequently Spring semester each academic year will be offered as elective. The interns of both semesters will be able to rotate for 8 hours per day as divided by the number of semester weeks during which the student is enrolled in the Program. The internship coordinator of Health Management Program, supervisors and preceptors of units and departments will determine the work schedules, hours and regular attendance of the interns at the internship settings. 
HLMN 102: Health Systems Management I 
This course is designed as an introduction to the history of the development and growth of Health Services Organizations (HSO} in private and public sectors in the United States. It covers principles of health care health delivery management, leadership, coordination, direction, control, human resources, governance, strategic planning, communications and quality assurance and health care finance for profit and not- for profits, as well as public health care delivery services. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MGMT 301, ECON 001&002 and/or Junior/Senior Standing. 

HLMN 201: Community Health Organizations 
This course is designed for students in allied health, nursing and health sciences management. It covers the latest trends in public and private health care delivery services, health disparities with focus on underserved urban and rural populations in USA. It will provide students with the knowledge and skills necessary for a broad overview of health education, prevention and treatment of diseases, as well as community organization, program planning, minority health, health care, mental health, environmental health, drugs, safety, and occupational health. The learner based course will enable student to develop competency in quality assessment and improvement for patient care in the community health settings. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
HLMN 102, HLMN /AHCC 202, MATH 009. AHCC 003 or major in Allied Health Sciences and Nursing Professions. 

HLMN 304: Global Leadership Inter. 
This is a Credit/No Credit course in which students can earn academic credit for integrating an internship experience with academic work. This experience is both practical and educational. The internship sites can be local, state or federal public health agency, a not-for-profit organization or a private sector company, where the students will have a supervised experience in observing or applying public health practice and/or public health programming 
Credits: 
3 

HLMN 305: Health Care Finance 
Credits: 
3 

HLMN 306: Principles of Epidemiology 
This course provides an introduction to the epidemiological perspective on health and disease. The course emphasizes the principles and methods used to describe and evaluate the patterns of illness in communities and in population subgroups. Methods and research designs used in the investigation of the etiology of infectious and noninfectious disease are presented. Lectures and laboratory examples illustrate a wide range of contemporary health problems. 
Credits: 
3 

HLMN 315: Health Informatics 
This course introduces health informatics, the field devoted to the optimal use of data, information, and knowledge to advance individual health, health care, public health, and health-related research. Students will learn the application of informatics skills and knowledge to health-related problems. 
Credits: 
3 

HLMN 400: Health Operations Research 
Credits: 
3 

HLMN 401: Global Health 
This course will provide you with an overview of the most important health challenges facing the world today. You will gain insight into how challenges have changed over time, we will discuss the likely determinants of such changes and examine future projections. Successful international strategies and programs promoting human health will be highlighted and global health governance structures will be mapped and the role of the key actors explored. 
Credits: 
3 

HLMN 402: Health Management Internship 
The Internship Program is designed as integrative practicum for senior students in Health Management Major. The course syllabus and Policies evolved from integrative didactic and practical experiences that bridge efficient and effective learning from the classrooms to the real world experiences leading to successful employment or advanced graduate studies in health care administration disciplines. The contents of the prerequisite courses in the four-year curriculum of study and job descriptions provide the foundation for students to practice management under the supervision of qualified preceptors and academic coordinator responsible for providing adequate settings or placement in public and private health services agency and organizations such as health departments, hospitals, HMO, Long Term and Home Health Care, Private Practices, as well as NIH, HRSA and other National, State and Local organizations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Senior Status and approval of Internship Coordinator, Academic Advisor and Chair of the Department/Program. 

HLMN 404: Health Policy 
Health Policy course is designed for students in the allied health sciences, nursing and health administration and business management undergraduate programs. It covers concepts, tools, and techniques of health policy formulation, process and implementation. It provides historical perspectives and strategies in planning, organizing, coordinating, financing and evaluation and comparing health care nationally and internationally. It uses teaching tools such multidisciplinary team evidence-based and case studies in health torts, patient rights, private and universal insurance including Medicare and Medicaid reform, health laws and Affordable Health Care Acts and Management debates in private and public sectors in the United States and globally, as applicable. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
HLMN 102, HLMN 405, HLMN 406, AHCC 301 and/or Major in Allied Health Sciences and Nursing Division. 

HLMN 405: Health Care Finance 
This course is designed for health management major. It covers health care financial management, budgeting and strategic planning. It employs concepts, tools and techniques applicable to heath care organizations, policies and financing including affordable patient care act and policies. Special focus will be on financial management private practice, Medicaid, Medicare, Managed Care and Long Term Health, Nome Health Care and Health Insurance Exchange Policies and Management. It will also cover the concept of financing private entrepreneurship in health related organizations. The course is designed for students in allied health, nursing, pharmacy, public health, accounting and business administration undergraduate studies. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ACCT 201, HLMN 102, HLMN 409. MATH 009, MGMT 303 or Equivalent plus Junior/Senior level. 

HLMN 406: Epidemiology and Public Health 
This course is designed to provide professional growth and understanding of public health and health management dynamics using the principles of epidemiology and research theories and methods and their applicability to demographics, rapid assessment techniques, survey analysis, health indicators (mortality and morbidity), risk assessment and control and randomized studies useful for health systems designs including needs assessment, planning, managing, planning and evaluation. Special focus will be on the health, cultural and socio-economic determinants, evidence-based surveys and operational research methods and analysis including case studies that affect health status of minority, access to essential health care, capacity building and health disparities for population in underserved populations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
HLMN 102, HLMN 201, HLMN 409, INFO 204, NUTR 160, AHCC 003, MATH 009 or Major in Allied Health Sciences and Nursing Equivalent courses as approved by the Departments. 

HLMN 408: Health Management Capstone Seminar 
The Health Management Capstone Seminar is designed for senior students majoring health sciences and management with Bachelor of Science in Health Sciences in the Department of Health Sciences and Management of College of Nursing and Allied Health Sciences. It provide comprehensive knowledge and skills by integrating four year curriculum of study with best practices in academic didactic and real work experiences in health delivery organizations and public health administration. The focus will be on problem solving management case studies and multimedia presentation of weekly assignments by each focus groups papers and peer discussions and questioning period. PREREQUISTE: Completion of Curriculum of Studies and Senior/Prospective Graduate in Health Management Sciences Program 
Credits: 
3 

HLMN 409: Health Systems Management II 
This course is designed to build on the foundation courses offered at the School of Business Management Minor Courses and Health Management Concentration Core Courses in the Department of Health Sciences and Management, College of Nursing and Allied Health Sciences. The course content focuses on prerequisite courses and overviews of health systems theories and practices such as US Health Services Organizations, Management of Health Services Organizations, Governance Structures and functions of HSOs; Communications and Information, Strategic Management of Health Systems, Quality Assurance and Assessment, Decision-Making and Evaluation Measurements. It also focuses on students as learners and participants in group activities as well as other multimedia techniques, project reports and presentations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MGMT 301, HLMN 102, INFO 204, AHCC 003, AHCC 202 and Junior Standing 

HLMN 410: Health Economics 
This course provides the core microeconomic theories and concepts needed to understand health and health care issues in both the developed and developing world. It describes how the markets for health and health services are different from other goods, with a particular emphasis on the role of government and market failure. In addition it discusses the theoretical and empirical aspects of key health economics issues, including the demand for health and health services, supply side concerns, health insurance, the provision of public goods, and related topics. The course encourages students to fundamentally and rigorously examine the role of the market for the provision of health and health services and how public policy can influence these markets. 
Credits: 
3 

MDAN 168: Basic Gross Anatomy 
The gross anatomy course introduces the students to the anatomy of the human body by presenting the fundamental concept of the body as an interrelated set of organ systems. The course is structured to study the human body in a regional approach, while emphasizing the relationship between form and function. 
Credits: 
4 

Nutritional Sciences 
NUTR 
The Department of Nutritional Sciences is a part of the Division of Allied Health Sciences which is located in the College of Nursing and Allied Health Sciences. The Department provides challenging educational programs for our students. The Department of Nutritional Sciences offers the Bachelor of Science Degree in Nutritional Sciences. The course of study provides a basic core for all students in the program and yet offers flexibility for pursuing career goals. The curriculum allows students to complete the general education and basic science courses in the first two years. During the last two years, students, along with their advisors, select courses, which prepare them to become dietitians or nutritionist. The Bachelor of Science is Degree is offered with emphases in Community Nutrition, Human Nutrition and Food, and the fully accredited CoordinatedUndergraduate Program in Dietetics. The department also offers a three semester verification program for individuals to complete the practicum requirement for dietetic registration. More than three semesters may be needed to complete the verification program if the student needs to take additional courses. 
Many students use this foundation at the Bachelor's level to prepare for further graduate/professional study in nutrition, medicine, and dentistry. Many of our graduates are employed as health care providers, researchers, educators, policy makers and administrators locally, nationally and internationally. 
Accreditation 
The Coordinated Dietetics Program is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Education in Nutrition and Dietetics (ACEND) the accrediting agency for the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, 120 South Riverside Plaza, Suite 2000, Chicago, IL 60606, 312.899.0040, ext.5400, www.eatright.org/acend. 
NUTR 006: Introduction to Foods 
Presents the principal underlying the scientific preparation and care of food. Two hour lectures and one two-hour laboratory period per week. Fall semester. 
Credits: 
4 

NUTR 130: Nutritional Biochemistry 
Examination of the fundamental processes associated with the cellular metabolism of food stuffs - carbohydrates, fats, proteins, vitamins and minerals. Fall semester only. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
NUTR 161, Org. Chem 142. 

NUTR 160: Nutrition 
Study of the food constituents and how the body utilizes them for optimum health through the life cycle, with emphasis on the cell as the basic unit of nutrition and development; also includes intercultural and interdisciplinary aspects of foods and applied nutrition. 
Credits: 
3 

NUTR 161: Nutrition for Health Majors 
Study of how the body uses nutrients for optimum health, emphasizing the cell as the basic unit of nutrition and development. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
concurrent with CHEM: 003- Health majors only. 

NUTR 169: Field Experience in Human Nutrition and Food 
Students are placed in a variety of community organizations m to gain practical experience in a wide variety of nutrition based disciplines. 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM: 004-156, 571-175, and Research Methods- 416. 

NUTR 175: Advanced Nutrition 
Treats digestion, absorption, and utilization of essential nutrients: interrelationships and concepts of animal experimentation. Spring semester only. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
180-003 and CHEM: 156, NUTR: 130, or concurrent enrollment. 

NUTR 183: Community Nutrition 
Evaluation of nutrition and food programs of international, federal and state agencies in a community context, including nutrition education and food distribution. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
NUTR: 161, NUTR: 302. 

NUTR 189: Food Chemistry and Analysis 
Involves principles and methodology of food analysis; food additives; and laboratory experience in techniques for protein, fat ash, and moisture. Spring semester only. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 004 and NUTR 006. 

NUTR 190: 191: Special Projects in Human Nutrition and Food 
Directed study. Prereqs. NUTR 160 and Instructor's consent. 
Credits: 
3 

NUTR 200: Into Hlth Educ Nutr 
This course provides students with a background in the basics of nutrition and stresses the link between nutrition practices, health, disease, and exercise performance. 
Credits: 
2 

NUTR 302: Survey of Nutrition 
Addresses basic knowledge, skill and insight in nutrition required for realistic functioning of health care professionals in providing quality health care. 
Credits: 
2 

NUTR 310: Introduction to Dietetics 
This course introduces students to the field of dietetics including its diversity. It covers the history of the dietetic profession and the ethical guidelines for the profession. 
Credits: 
3 

NUTR 311: Organization and Management of Food and Nutrition Service 
This course includes the managerial processes with emphasis on food systems management. 
Credits: 
3 

NUTR 312: Food Service Systems Management theory 
Study of the functional subsystems as the transformation element in the food service system model. 
Credits: 
3 

NUTR 320: Nutrition during the Life Cycle 
Introduction to the nutritional needs of people throughout the life cycle. 
Credits: 
3 

NUTR 321: Practicum in Organization and Management of Food and Nutrition Services 
An educational/coordinated practical experience used to introduce students to the art of management, which allows them to comprehend links between theory and practice. 
Credits: 
2 

NUTR 322: Practicum in Quantity Foods 
An educational/coordinated approach is used to provide practical experience in quantity food production, service and management of a food service operation. 
Credits: 
3 

NUTR 323: Evaluation of Nutritional Status 
A study of the basic objectives, procedures and techniques involved in the assessment of the nutritional status of communities, households, and Individuals. 
Credits: 
3 

NUTR 325: Nutrition Care Management I 
A coordinated course designed to provide the student with basic knowledge and skills for nutrition care management. 
Credits: 
3 

NUTR 326: Nutrition Policy 
This course will introduce students to a range of food and nutrition policy concepts, institutions, stakeholders and pertinent issues in the United States. 
Credits: 
3 

NUTR 327: Hlth Plan & Prom 
In this course students will gain a foundation in the basics of nutrition and how the body utilizes nutrients that contribute to health. 
Credits: 
3 

NUTR 410: Medical Nutrition Therapy I 
Investigates the role of diet in the prevention and treatment of disease. Fall semester. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 156, or NUTR 130, NUTR 008, and NUTR 175 or concurrent enrollment. 

NUTR 411: Nutritional Care Management II 
This course focuses on nutrition care in various disease states and the modification of diets relative to diseases. 
Credits: 
4 

NUTR 413: Medical Nutrition Therapy II 
Investigates the role of diet in the prevention and treatment of disease. Fall semester. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 156, or NUTR 130, NUTR 008, and NUTR 175 or concurrent enrollment. 

NUTR 415: Diet Therapy Dry Lab 
This course introduces the student to dietary calculations, modification and dietary planning for disease states. 
Credits: 
1 

NUTR 416: Research Methods in Nutrition 
This course introduces major students to various research techniques for the conduct and presentation of research in the nutritional sciences, including application of basic statistical methods. 
Credits: 
3 

NUTR 417: Nutr in Hlth & Dis 
The course will cover the methodology used to determine dietary, nutritional and health status and how evidence is gathered to determine the links between diet, nutrition and health. 
Credits: 
3 

NUTR 418: Soc Deter Hlth Nutr 
This is an introductory course on social determinants of population health with a focus on the United States. The course will introduce you to, or reinforce your knowledge of, issues related to health that consider behavioral, psychological and structural factors in population health beyond the healthcare system. We will examine social, economic, and political factors that contribute to health inequalities and suggest innovative ways to reduce disparities in health when the goal is to achieve health equity. 
Credits: 
3 

NUTR 419: Field Placement 
This course is designed for students with an interest in understanding and/or practicing nutrition and health education programs and food and nutrition services in a community context. Students will learn the issues and challenges surrounding the delivery of nutrition and health information programs to general and specific (at-risk and minority) populations 
Credits: 
1 

NUTR 420: Practicum Comprehensive 
Provides experience in the nutritional care management of people throughout the life cycle in varying stages of illness and wellness. 
Credits: 
10 
Prerequisites: 
NUTR 311, 410, 411 and 415. 

NUTR 421: Global Hlth Nutr 
Includes travel abroad/alternative spring break. 
Credits: 
3 

NUTR 425: Issues in Dietetics end Nutrition 
This course incorporates current Issues into the comprehensive management of nutritional care. 
Credits: 
2 

Nursing 
NURS 
The Howard University Division of Nursing, while cognizant of the nature of society and the health care delivery system, develops students at the bachelor's and master's level who can effectively and efficiently address the diverse and complex health care needs of society. The Division of Nursing was established in 1969 with a program of studies leading to the bachelor's degree in nursing. The Division of Nursing also offers the Master of Science Degree in Nursing and a Post-Master's Certificate for Family Nurse Practitioner. 
The Bachelor of Science program offers a balanced curriculum including courses in the liberal arts, the sciences, the humanities, and nursing. The majority of the nursing courses are concentrated in the junior and senior years and involve classroom and clinical learning experiences in hospitals, long-term care facilities, homeless shelters, patients' homes and other community-based settings. Students in the Bachelor's Degree program develop competencies in the care of adults, children, child-bearing families and the elderly. A theoretical base for nursing practice is laid early in the program and students grow in their ability to apply theory in developing systems of care for patients. Course work and practical application in management/leadership and research enhance the student's ability to think creatively, critically and to solve problems. 
An R.N. track within the bachelor's degree program was initiated during the 1988-89 academic year. This track allows the R.N. with an associate degree or diploma to receive credit for prior nursing and science courses through a variety of validation procedures. Registered nurses from local associate degree nursing programs within the past five years may receive a minimum of 60 transfer credits towards the Bachelor of Science Degree. No validation testing is required for articulated students. 
A 22-month Advanced Placement Program is also a part of undergraduate level studies for students with previously earned degrees in areas other than nursing and/or a significant number of credits in specific course areas. This program expedites students’ progression in nursing. The undergraduate curriculum emphasizes critical thinking and problem solving, health promotion and prevention, community-based interventions, and the general climate of the evolving health care delivery system. 
The diversity of the Washington, D.C. community provides students with a variety of learning opportunities and challenges. The Division of Nursing has adopted the issues of homelessness and care of the elderly as emphases within both the undergraduate and graduate curricula as well as rallying points for community service by faculty, students and staff. The Division of Nursing has also expanded in the realm of international nursing. There has been significant involvement in consultation, instruction and curriculum development in some of the developing African countries. 
Accreditation 
The Division of Nursing is accredited by the Commission of Collegiate Nursing Education (CCNE), One Dupont Circle, NW, Suite 530, Washington, DC 20036, 202.887.6791, http://www.aacn.nche.edu/ccne-accreditation. 
 
 
 
NAHS 171: Human Anatomy and Physiology I 
A study of the structure and function of the human body, beginning with cells and tissues and then continuing with the study of the 11 major systems. 
Credits: 
4 

NAHS 172: Human Anatomy and Physiology II 
Continuation of NAHS 171 
Credits: 
4 

NURS 304: Pathophysiology 
This course is designed to provide students the opportunity to develop an understanding of the pathophysiological basis for the clinical manifestation of disease processes. Emphasis is placed on the mechanisms of disease and alterations of structure and function that result in signs and symptoms of disease in individuals across the lifespan. 
Credits: 
3 

NURS 306: Introduction to Pharmacology 
This course focuses on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of some identified drugs that affect persons across the life span. Areas of emphasis will include; the nursing process, nursing implications of the selected and related drugs, the role of a nurse in legal and research aspects of drug administration and medication calculations for oral and parenteral drugs. 
Credits: 
3 

NURS 307: Health Assessment Across the Lifespan 
This course provides learners an opportunity to acquire skills of history talking, physical assessment, and documentation needed to conduct a comprehensive health assessment including the physical, psychosocial, and environmental aspects of health.. Emphasis is placed health assessment as a systemic and organized examination that will provide accurate data on which to form valid nursing diagnoses and plan of care. Effective communication, assessment, and documentation will be practiced in the laboratory setting. The learner will demonstrate the techniques of physical assessment consisting of inspection, palpation, percussion, and auscultation. 
Credits: 
3 

NURS 307OL: Health Assessment Across the Lifespan 
This course provides learners an opportunity to acquire skills of history talking, physical assessment, and documentation needed to conduct a comprehensive health assessment including the physical, psychosocial, and environmental aspects of health.. Emphasis is placed health assessment as a systemic and organized examination that will provide accurate data on which to form valid nursing diagnoses and plan of care. Effective communication, assessment, and documentation will be practiced in the laboratory setting. The learner will demonstrate the techniques of physical assessment consisting of inspection, palpation, percussion, and auscultation. 
Credits: 
3 

NURS 308OL: Role Transition 
This course focuses on the important topics and trends within the nursing discipline and baccalaureate educational process to facilitate the transition from technical nurse to professional nurse. The emphasis is on professional components of the various roles of the baccalaureate nurse in health care. Students will utilize critical thinking to analyze the role of the baccalaureate nurse as it relates to professional standards, life-long learning, professional development, and the use of evidenced based practice. The student will apply knowledge of the history of the university and profession of the nursing to build a foundation for practice. 
Credits: 
3 

NURS 313: Informatics and Technology 
This course is designed to provide the student with an introduction to the emerging field of nursing informatics. The student will explore and examine computer technology and the tools of the Internet and World Wide Web, with a focus on selected computer applications and use of cyber-technology as it relates to nursing practice. The student will also examine the basics of information systems, expert systems, and telecommunication and the impact of these technologies, on nursing administration, education, advanced clinical practice and research. 
Credits: 
2 

NURS 313OL: Informatics and Technology 
This course is designed to provide the student with an introduction to the emerging field of nursing informatics. The student will explore and examine computer technology and the tools of the Internet and World Wide Web, with a focus on selected computer applications and use of cyber-technology as it relates to nursing practice. The student will also examine the basics of information systems, expert systems, and telecommunication and the impact of these technologies, on nursing administration, education, advanced clinical practice and research. 
Credits: 
2 

NURS 315: Concepts of Health and Illness Across the Lifespan 
This course focuses on nursing concepts that beginning nursing Learners need to provide care to diverse populations across the lifespan. Learners will explore various nursing theories, health promotion and their use with the nursing process. Emphasis is placed on the development of critical thinking and clinical judgment skills required to promote health and manage illness. The theoretical basis for assessing and managing basic human needs is explored across the lifespan. 
Credits: 
3 

NURS 315OL: Concepts of Health and Illness Across the Lifespan 
This course focuses on nursing concepts that nurses need to provide care to diverse populations across the lifespan. Students will explore various nursing theories, health promotion and their use with the nursing process. Emphasis is placed on the enhancement of critical thinking and clinical judgment skills required to promote health and manage illness. The theoretical basis for assessing and managing basic human needs is explored across the lifespan. 
Credits: 
3 

NURS 320: Fundamentals of Nursing Practice 
This course focuses on nursing skills that beginning nursing students will need to provide safe, effective care to individuals experiencing health alterations across the lifespan. Emphasis will be placed on critical thinking, therapeutic communication, and interventions that promote optimal patient outcomes. Ethical, legal, and professional standards will be explored within the context of nursing practice. The nursing process will be used as a framework for problem solving, decision making, and organizing care of individuals. Guided lab and clinical experiences will provide students opportunities to acquire and practice appropriately leveled nursing skills. 
Credits: 
5 

NURS 321: Introduction to Professional Nursing Practice 
This course is designed to provide students with the opportunity to develop an understanding of the history of nursing and issues and trends of modern nursing. Emphasis will be placed on the legal, ethical, and professional standards of nursing practice. The course will provide an opportunity to explore the roles of the professional nurse as designer, coordinator, and provider of care. 
Credits: 
2 

NURS 323OL: Nursing Research 
This course is designed to provide students the opportunity to develop an understanding of the research process in the nursing discipline. The course focuses on the contribution of research to the solution of problems in nursing. Emphasis is placed on defining a clinical research problem through an examination and critique of studies from nursing research and related disciplines. The use of evidence-based research in nursing is introduced. 
Credits: 
2 

NURS 325: Adult Health Nursing 
This course is designed to prepare the student to provide safe, holistic care for individuals with acute and chronic illnesses while applying concepts and principles from liberal arts, sciences, humanities, and the nursing discipline. Emphasis is placed on critical thinking, clinical judgment, decision-making, and health education. Clinical experiences provide an opportunity to apply theoretical knowledge in the performance of competencies that promote optimal patient outcomes. 
Credits: 
7 

NURS 326: Nursing of the Childbearing Family 
This course is designed to prepare the student to utilize the nursing process in providing care for families during the childbearing phase of the life cycle. The childbearing phase includes the preconception, antepartum, intrapartum, postpartum and neonatal periods. The course examines physiological, psychological, socio-cultural and developmental aspects of nursing care for the client. Emphasis is placed on critical thinking, clinical judgment, decision-making, and health education. Clinical experiences provide an opportunity to apply theoretical knowledge in the performance of competencies, to become familiar with various technologies involved in the care of the client, and to develop skills in caring for individuals and families that promote optimal patient outcomes. 
Credits: 
5 

NURS 327: Interdisciplinary Health Care Ethics 
This course introduces learners to ethical and bioethical issues confronting healthcare providers within the practice setting. Through didactic and small group instructions, ethical theory and principles are introduced and used to critically analyze and construct well-reasoned responses to ethical dilemmas. Utilizing the Beaubeu Grid method to collect and analyze case information, learners will refine their critical thinking skills (both verbal and written) through reading, writing, and resolving case material presented in the small group class sessions. Emphasis on collaborative dialogue between and among disciplines represents the hallmark of this course. 
Credits: 
2 

NURS 327OL: Interdisciplinary Health Care Ethics 
This course introduces learners to ethical and bioethical issues confronting healthcare providers within the practice setting. Through didactic and small group instructions, ethical theory and principles are introduced and used to critically analyze and construct well-reasoned responses to ethical dilemmas. Utilizing the Beaubeu Grid method to collect and analyze case information, learners will refine their critical thinking skills (both verbal and written) through reading, writing, and resolving case material presented in the small group class sessions. Emphasis on collaborative dialogue between and among disciplines represents the hallmark of this course. 
Credits: 
2 

NURS 329OL: Nursing Issues 
This course focuses on contemporary issues and trends within the nursing discipline. Learners will utilize critical thinking in the analysis and presentation of issues affecting nursing and health care in a global society. Legal, ethical, political, economic, and social issues are explored in a historical context to provide the student with perspective on the role of professional nursing in contemporary society. The importance of nursing science in nursing practice and in the development of nursing knowledge is included. 
Credits: 
3 

NURS 400: Elective Clinical Nursing 
The Clinical Nursing Elective course is a structured educational summer program designed to provide nursing students with an opportunity to improve their nursing skills in the clinical setting, while providing them with summer employment. Weekly educational sessions are designed specifically for the nurse externs. Nurse externs work within an agency to gain experience providing nursing care and services to patients. Nurse externs will work the assigned schedule as stipulated by the agency. The duties and responsibilities of the student nurse fall under the scope of practice for unlicensed health care providers within the agency providing the externship. 
Credits: 
3 

NURS 403: Nursing Research 
This course is designed to provide learners the opportunity to develop an understanding of the research process in the nursing discipline. The course focuses on the contribution of research to the solution of problems in nursing. Emphasis is placed on defining a clinical research problem through an examination and critique of studies from nursing research and related disciplines. The use of evidence-based research in nursing is introduced. 
Credits: 
2 

NURS 406: Senior Practicum 
Consolidation experience which includes theory and practice opportunities, and prepares students for the final year and selected area of focus. 
Credits: 
4 

NURS 412: Nursing of Infants and Children 
This course is designed to prepare the student to provide safe, holistic care for infants, children, and families. Emphasis is placed on critical thinking, clinical judgment, decision-making, and health education. Clinical experiences provide an opportunity to apply nursing theory and concepts when implementing interventions to achieve optimal health for infants, children, and families. 
Credits: 
5 

NURS 413: Culturally Congruent Care 
This course is designed to help students increase awareness of how the delivery and acceptance of health care may be influenced by social, cultural and environmental factors and increase the delivery of culturally competent and congruent care to individuals, families, groups, communities and institutions. The course will utilize cultural concepts; theories and models; cultural assessment; critical thinking; and evidence-based practice appropriate for developing knowledge. Emphasis is also placed upon the use of the Culturally Competent Model of Care. Students will be able to analyze cultural factors that facilitate/hinder communication. Furthermore, experiential activities and practical applications of the learned classroom material will contribute to life-long learning. 
Credits: 
3 

NURS 419: Death, Grief and Bereavement 
This course is designed to provide learners with an introduction to death and dying and in-depth study of grief and bereavement. The student will examine the multifaceted nature of dying, grief and the grieving process. Emphasis is placed on assisting the individual and family in coping during death, dying and grieving across the lifespan. Included is a discussion of strategies for self-care during dying and grief interventions. 
Credits: 
3 

NURS 419OL: Elective(Death, Grief and Bereavement) 
This course is designed to provide learners with an introduction to death and dying and in-depth study of grief and bereavement. The student will examine the multifaceted nature of dying, grief and the grieving process. Emphasis is placed on assisting the individual and family in coping during death, dying and grieving across the lifespan. Included is a discussion of strategies for self-care during dying and grief interventions. 
Credits: 
3 

NURS 421: Psychiatric Mental Health Nursing 
This course is designed to provide learners with the opportunity to implement the nursing process with individuals, families, and groups in the mental health setting. Clinical experiences provide the opportunity to apply theory and develop skills in the management of individuals, families, and groups to promote mental health. Emphasis is placed on achieving optimum mental health outcomes through collaboration with other health and social disciplines, community groups, and consumers. 
Credits: 
5 

NURS 431: Health Policy &Economics 
This course is designed to provide students the opportunity to develop an understanding and appreciation of the policy-making process and its impact on nursing practice, health care delivery and health care finance. Emphasis will be placed on analysis of major economic, historical, social, legal, political and ethical influences on policy formulation, implementation and evaluation. Through a variety of field experiences, the focus will be on critical analysis of and participating in health policy and politics that drive the health care delivery system of the United States. 
Credits: 
2 

NURS 431OL: Health Policy and Economics 
This course is designed to provide students the opportunity to develop an understanding and appreciation of the policy-making process and its impact on nursing practice, health care delivery and health care finance. Emphasis will be placed on analysis of major economic, historical, social, legal, political and ethical influences on policy formulation, implementation and evaluation. Through a variety of field experiences, the focus will be on critical analysis of and participating in health policy and politics that drive the health care delivery system of the United States. 
Credits: 
2 

NURS 434: Adult Health Nursing II 
This course is designed to provide a theoretical knowledge base in caring for high-acuity individuals experiencing complex care problems and to examine the interrelationships among physiological concepts to assure competent and safe nursing practice. Clinical experiences provide an opportunity to translate the critical pathophysiological concepts to the high acuity client in a clinically applicable manner and enhance clinical decision-making in the performance of competencies that promote optimal patient outcomes. 
Credits: 
5 

NURS 436: Community Health Nursing 
This course is designed to provide students with the opportunity to develop understanding of the concept of community primary healthcare. This course will provide opportunity to integrate the nursing process in care of individuals, families, groups, aggregates and populations in various community settings. Emphasis is on promoting optimal health outcomes through collaboration with inter-professional teams and community groups. 
Credits: 
3 

NURS 437OL: Community Mental Health Nursing 
This course is designed to provide students with the opportunity to develop understandings of the concepts of community and mental health nursing. The course will provide theory and clinical opportunities to integrate the nursing process in developing population-specific care in community and mental health settings. Emphasis is on promoting optimal health outcome through partnerships with inter-professional teams and community groups. 
Credits: 
5 

NURS 438: Nursing Leadership 
This course is designed to provide students the opportunity for role development as a designer, coordinator, and manager in the health care delivery systems. Concepts and theories of leadership management, organization change, decision making, finance, politics, and human resource management are examined. Leadership and management roles and strategies are analyzed in relation to a changing health care system. Emphasis is placed on the application of concepts and theories in a variety of settings. 
Credits: 
3 

NURS 438OL: Nursing Leadership 
This course is designed to provide students the opportunity for role development as a designer, coordinator, and manager in health care delivery systems. Concepts and theories of leadership, management, organization change, decision making, finance, politics, and human resource management are examined. Leadership and management roles and strategies are analyzed in relation to a changing health care system. Emphasis is placed on the application of the concepts and theories in a variety of settings. 
Credits: 
3 

NURS 440: Nursing Synthesis 
This course is designed to provide students the opportunity for role development as a designer, coordinator, and manager in the health care delivery systems. Concepts and theories of leadership management, organization change, decision making, finance, politics, and human resource management are examined. Leadership and management roles and strategies are analyzed in relation to a changing health care system. Emphasis is placed on the application of concepts and theories in a variety of settings. 
Credits: 
3 

Radiation Therapy Program 
RASC 
Radiation therapy utilizes radiation and radioactive isotopes in the treatment of disease, primarily cancer. The radiation therapists provide services for treatment of malignant and non-malignant disease. They are responsible for localizing the tumor, implementing the treatment plan, observing and evaluating clinical progress of the patient. 
The therapists are also responsible for safe operation of high tech, high-energy radiation -producing equipment; and assisting in the preparation and administration of different types of radioactive material used for therapeutic purposes. The radiation therapists are professionals who not only possess superior clinical skills, but strong academic and theoretical knowledge as well. The clinical education phase of the program is designed to reinforce didactic information as it relates to clinical procedures. It is expected that through this effort, greater cohesion can be achieved between the two learning environments, thereby facilitating a greater transfer of knowledge between them. 
Degree Program 
The four-year integrated academic and clinical program has two divisions. The Lower Division includes the first and second years where students complete general education requirements. Individuals who successfully complete all Lower Division requirements are eligible to apply for admission into the Upper Division. The Upper Division includes didactic courses as well as a clinical education component throughout the third and fourth years. The clinical education phase of the program is designed to reinforce didactic information as it relates to clinical procedures. It is expected that through this effort, greater cohesion can be achieved between the two learning environments, thereby facilitating a greater transfer of knowledge between them. During clinical education, students have an opportunity to receive practical experience at prestigious affiliating hospitals. 
Accreditation 
The Radiation Therapy Program is accredited by the Joint Review Committee on Education in Radiologic Technology, 20 N. Wacker Drive, Suite 2850, Chicago, IL 60606; 312.704.5300: www.jrcert.org. At its May 2013 meeting, the Joint Review Committee on Education in Radiologic Technology (JRCERT) voted to place the Howard University Radiation Therapy Program on probation until its next comprehensive review in September 2014. Accreditation–Probation is a temporary status of accreditation conferred when a program does not meet the Standards and when the capability of the program to provide an acceptable educational experience for its students is threatened. Specific questions regarding the program and its plans regarding probation should be directed to Ms. Adrienne Harrison, M. S., R. T. (T), Program Director at 202-806-5920. 
Admissions 
Lower Division 
Students must meet Howard University’s general admission requirements. 
• 
Cumulative grade point average of 2.8 on a 4.0 scale 

• 
Submission of program application forms and official transcript(s) by February 15th 

• 
Background Screening and Assessment Examination 


Upper Division 
Students should request the program application package from the Department of Radiation Therapy. Requirements include: 
The completed application package must include: 
• 
Completed Upper Division Application Form 

• 
Attain a minimum grade point average of 2.8 on a 4.0 scale 

• 
Statement of Interest and Goals; Biographical Sketch 

• 
Three Recommendation Forms and Personal Interview 


Technical Standards for Admissions 
Individuals with disabilities will be individually considered on the basis of their ability. Reasonable accommodation for disabled students will be provided as required by law. NOTE: Should you desire to arrange for a disability accommodation in conjunction with completing the application process, please contact Dr. Elaine Bourne Heath, Special Student Services, (202) 238-2420. 
AHCC 414: Radiation Therapy Scientific Inquiry 
Designed to prepare students with basic principles of research and statistical methods. Principles of scientific research will provide a foundation for advanced research to develop research papers in the profession. Prereqs: Statistics course 
Credits: 
2 

RASC 211: Radiation Therapy Orientation 
This course provides an introduction and an overview of the discipline of radiation therapy. The content includes the basic principles, practices and policies regarding the radiation therapist’s role in the management of cancer, professionalism, and ethical issues in cancer care. Academic, departmental personnel, administrative structures, radiation and health safety procedures, related professional organizations, professional skills and life-long learning are discussed. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore status in the program or by permission of the department head. 

RASC 310: Clinical Radiotherapy I 
Clinical practicum in radiation oncology facilities at affiliating institutions to fulfill sequential clinical program requirements. Course includes an extensive overview of program and clinical policies, procedures and expectations in preparation for clinical practicum. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
Successful completion of all prerequisite courses and admission into the upper division of the program. 

RASC 311: Principles and Practice of Radiation Therapy 
Provides an overview of the historic and current management of neoplastic disease, decision process, physical and technical aspects of radiation therapy, function and structure of simulation/treatment equipment, ethical and legal considerations related to the scope and practice of radiation therapists. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RASC 211 and successful admission into the upper division of the program. 

RASC 312: Environment and Radiation Protection 
Content includes basic principles of radiation protection, biological effects, surveys, detection, measurement, personnel monitoring, environmental, health, legal and safety requirements of federal, state, and local regulatory agencies and healthcare organizations. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
Successful completion of all prerequisite courses and admission into the upper division of the program 

RASC 313: Radiation Therapy Physics I 
Presents the applied physics related to radiation therapy and focuses on structure of matter, properties of matter, properties of radiation, nuclear transformations, principles of image production, treatment equipment, types of radiation, beam quality, dose measurement and distribution. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Successful completion of all prerequisite courses and admission into the upper division of the program 

RASC 314: Cross Sectional Anatomy 
Content includes the medical imaging modalities in radiation therapy with special emphasis on CT. Knowledge of anatomic structures are reviewed through a variety of sectional images. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
Successful completion of prerequisite courses and admission into the upper division of the program. 

RASC 315: Introduction to Oncology 
Course provides an introduction to the field of Oncology, including Surgical Oncology, Medical Oncology, Radiation Oncology, Radiation Effects and Complementary and Alternative Medicine in Cancer Management. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
Successful completion of prerequisite courses and admission into the upper division of the program. 

RASC 320: Clinical Radiation Therapy II 
A continuation of sequential assignments at radiation oncology affiliations to fulfill clinical program requirements. This clinical course is designed to foster the development of future radiation therapists. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
Completion of first semester in upper division. 

RASC 323: Imaging and Radiation Therapy 
This course is designed to establish a basic knowledge of Radiation Therapy related imaging principles and techniques used during the treatment planning and verification process. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
RASC 310. 

RASC 324: Patient Care and Management 
Provides the student with concepts and competencies in assessment, management, and evaluation of patient care including considerations of physical and psychosocial aspects. Routine and emergency patient care procedures will be will be emphasized. The role of the radiation therapist in patient education 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
RASC 310, 311, 312, 313. 

RASC 325: Radiation Oncology I 
The course is part two in the overview of multidisciplinary cancer management. Content covered includes anatomy, physiology review, etiology, epidemiology, detection and work-up, diagnosis, patterns of spread, staging, treatment techniques, organs at risk and multimodality management, and prognosis of specific cancer sites with emphasis on treatment assessment, delivery and evaluation. Also reviews the role of the radiation therapist in patient education including associated acute and chronic effects and management. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RASC 311, RASC 310, MDAN 168, MPHY 101 or equivalent. 

RASC 326: Radiation Therapy Physics II 
A continuation of RASC 313 to include the physical parameters of various radiation treatment techniques, calculations and measurements. Also included are quality assurance considerations and brachytherapy. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RASC 313. 

RASC 327: Pathophysiology 
Presents basic pathological concepts and principles related to the nature of disease and its effects on the body tissues and its organs. This information will assist the student radiation therapist in the describing the pathologic conditions, clinical signs and symptoms and associated laboratory methods used to assess the.diagnosis and the treatment of various diseases encountered during clinical practice. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MDAN 168, MPHY 102. 

RASC 330: Clinical Radiation Therapy III 
Clinical practicum in the radiation oncology departments at affiliated institutions 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RASC 320 as well as successful completion of first year Upper Division courses. 

RASC 335: Clinical Radiotherapy IV 
Clinical practicum in the radiation oncology departments at affiliated institutions. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RASC 330. 

RASC 410: Clinical Radiotherapy V 
Clinical practicum in the radiation oncology departments at affiliating institutions or in associated departments 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
Successful completion of RASC 335. 

RASC 412: Treatment Planning I 
Focuses on basic concepts of radiation treatment planning through lecture and laboratory exercises. Includes the theoretical and practical application of dose calculations, localization of tumors, and factors that impact basic treatment planning 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
RASC 313, 327. 

RASC 414: Problem Solving 
Continuation of content that is designed to address issues related to the scope and practice of radiation therapists, Lecture/Lab. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
RASC 335. 

RASC 415: Radiation Oncology II 
Completion of Radiation Oncology in the management of various systems in cancer care delivery. RASC 325 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RASC 324, 327, 330, 335. 

RASC 420: Clinical Radiation Therapy VI 
Completion of sequential clinical practice at mastery-level competence in radiation oncology conducted at affiliating institutions 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
RASC 410. 

RASC 422: Problem Seminar 
Designed to provide a comprehensive review for seniors in preparation to take the national board examination and problem solve various situations they may encounter during entry-level employment. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
Completion of three semesters of professional study. 

RASC 426: Treatment Planning II 
Continuation of Treatment Planning I. RASC 410, 412. 
Credits: 
2 

RASC 427: Radiation Biology 
Principles of cell biology and radiation interaction, effects of radiation and other factors on cell response, acute and chronic effects of radiation are discussed 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
RASC 312. 

RASC 428: Quality Management 
Managing quality with relation to the field of radiation therapy. 
Credits: 
2 

RASC 430: Clinical Radiation Therapy VII 
Clinical practicum in the radiation oncology departments at affiliated institutions (if needed to complete graduation requirements). 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
RASC 420. 

School of Education 
The School of Education prepares transformational leaders as highly qualified teachers, reflective practitioners, effective administrators and engaged researchers who influence educational policies and practices relevant to Black and other underserved populations; we empower individuals, schools, and communities; and we promote racial and social justice. 
 
DIVISIONS AND DEPARTMENTS 
DEPARTMENT OF CURRICULUM & INSTRUCTION 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP & POLICY STUDIES 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN DEVELOPMENT & PSYCHOEDUCATIONAL STUDIES 
 
 
UNDERGRADUATE MAJORS, PROGRAMS, AND CONCENTRATIONS 
Elementary Education 
Human Development 
Secondary Minors: English, Math, Music Education, Physical Education, Social Studies, Theatre Arts 
 
SEED 150: Survey and Education of Exceptional Children 
Discusses current trends in special education and the educational psychological needs of students with disabilities.  This course SEED 150 is the same as ELEM 150 
Credits: 
3 

Elementary Education 
EDUC 
EDUC 100: Orientation &Pre-Professional Seminar 
This course is a prerequisite for matriculation in the Bachelor of Science in Elementary Education program. It is designed to orient potential candidates to the University, to the School of Education, and to the elementary education program. A variety of individual and small group reflections, discussions, activities, simulations, etc. will provide students with a critical look at the teaching profession. Students will have an opportunity to assess or reassess their desire, dispositions, and suitability for teaching diverse elementary school children. Students must satisfactorily complete the 1-credit orientation/seminar no later than the end of the first semester of their freshman year. Undergraduate 
Credits: 
1 

EDUC 120: International Education for Contemporary Societies 
This course is designed to provide a comprehensive overview of the policies and practices of educational systems around the world, with a special emphasis on the global south. Using an interdisciplinary lens, the focus is on developing global competencies that promote global citizenship and a better understanding of global education issues in the contemporary world. Global education movements like Education For All (EFA), gender inequalities, education and conflict, education and immigration, teacher quality, and international conventions and agreements will be examined. A significant international service learning component is also included and is designed to help bridge theory and practice from the local to the global. Undergraduate 
Credits: 
3 

EDUC 210: Foundations &Urban Education 
This foundational course will examine urban education from the perspectives of what it means to teach in urban environments, issues that impact urban schools, policies and practices that influence teaching, families and urban communities, and classroom management. It will focus on a broad interdisciplinary view of school as an educational institution and its relationship with urban societies and communities. Sociological and philosophical views will be used to examine how history, race, class, politics, and media have influenced the structure and function of urban education systems. Students will be expected to engage in field experiences in area classrooms. 
Credits: 
3 

EDUC 212: Educational Psychology: Learning &African American Learners 
This course provides pre-service teachers with the theoretical bases of learning and development necessary to obtain the goals of effective teaching and learning among African American and other diverse student populations. Candidates will examine many questions and answers involving education in today’s urban society and promote the understanding and appreciation of principles associated with the learner, learning, and classroom processes. The primary focus of this course is the integration of theories of child growth and development within the practical setting of the school environment. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Department Approval 

EDUC 212: Educational Psychology: Learning &African American Learners 
This course provides pre-service teachers with the theoretical bases of learning and development necessary to obtain the goals of effective teaching and learning among African American and other diverse student populations. Candidates will examine many questions and answers involving education in today’s urban society and promote the understanding and appreciation of principles associated with the learner, learning, and classroom processes. The primary focus of this course is the integration of theories of child growth and development within the practical setting of the school environment. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Department Approval 

EDUC 218: Foundations &Processes of Reading Acquisition 
This course provides pre-service/in-service candidates with knowledge, skills, and dispositions to provide evidence-based literacy instruction for African American and diverse learners in grades 1-6 in urban areas. The course develops students’ ability to deliver multiple methods of traditional and technology-based instruction to meet literacy needs in a variety of settings. Emphasis will be placed on asset-based theories and applications that can positively influence students, families, and communities. 
Credits: 
3 

EDUC 219: Schooling for Diverse Populations in American Society 
The course addresses the philosophy, history and sociology of American education, particularly with regard to the role of diversity in development and operation of the nation’s education system. Particular attention will be paid to major social, political, and economic forces that have shaped and continue to shape American schools and educational practices. Additionally, the course is designed to build among pre-service teachers a global awareness of how racial, cultural, linguistic, gender, income, and ability diversity affect educational opportunity. It is expected that this course will enable candidates to (a) discern the extent to which some forms of teaching and learning enhance democratic ideals, while others do not and (b) begin to develop a professional identity that also reflects the ideals of equal access and social justice. 
Credits: 
3 

EDUC 220: Learners with Diverse Cognitive, Behavior, &Language Characteristics 
This foundational course focuses on providing students with knowledge about individuals who possess exceptional learning needs because of their diverse cognitive, behavioral, and linguistic abilities. This course focuses on students considered to have high incidence disabilities, as well as those considered gifted. The course will challenge candidates to view all exceptional learning needs from an asset-based perspective while encouraging advocacy for a more equitable and inclusionary society. Candidates will examine the history of special education, legislation, and laws that support the educational rights of individuals with disabilities, their families, and caregivers. Field-based experiences will enable candidates to gain perspective on the life experiences, challenges, and abilities individuals with disabilities. 
Credits: 
3 

EDUC 221: Talent Development Model of Schooling 
This course is designed for pre-service educators to gain knowledge and skills predicated on a comprehensive schooling model – the Talent Development Model - that espouses that all students can learn to high standards and provides evidence-based practices, activities and programs to ensure that this lofty goal for students is actually attainable. The background and research base for this model will be presented, as will practical examples of what the model looks like when it is implemented in schools serving primarily urban or ethnic minority children and youth. 
Credits: 
3 

EDUC 222: Engaging Urban Parents, Families &Communities 
This course, in addition to providing a brief review of empirical data that supports the need for parent involvement, is designed to support pre-service candidates in broadening their conception of parent involvement. Candidates will become aware of the strategies that minority and low-income parents often use to support their children’s education; explore strategies for increasing the participation of culturally and linguistically diverse parents in traditional parent involvement activities; and generate strategies for collaborating in culturally responsive ways with families, other educators, related service providers, and personnel from community agencies. 
Credits: 
3 

EDUC 223: Instructional Technology for 21st Century 
This course emphasizes the design and facilitation of learning environments that apply technology-enhanced instructional strategies to maximize student learning. Candidates will apply current research and instructional design principles to create 21st century learning experiences for students. Topics will include technology concepts; use of technology-enhanced instructional strategies and materials; adaptive technology for children with exceptionalities; technology enhanced assessment/evaluation; and ethical issues surrounding the use of technology. Upon completion, students should be able to apply technology- enhanced instructional strategies, use a variety of technology resources, and demonstrate appropriate technology skills in educational environments. 
Credits: 
3 

EDUC 225: Earth Science and Elementary Science Practices (and Lab) 
This course provides candidates with knowledge, skills, and dispositions to render content-rich and rigorous science instruction for African American and diverse urban learners in grades 1-6. Candidates will be exposed to content that supports an elementary school science program including life science, physical science, environmental science, earth science and space science. Candidates will have opportunities to explain, interpret, analyze, synthesize, and evaluate major national and global issues and developments in these science disciplines. Hands on activities, demonstrations, field studies, and virtual labs and trips will be utilized to reinforce basic concepts. 
Credits: 
3 

EDUC 310: Educational Psychology and Special Education 
A course offering an opportunity to examine educational issues and additional learning needs from psychological perspectives. 
Credits: 
3 

EDUC 311: Special Education and Classroom Management 
This course focuses on providing students with knowledge about individuals who possess exceptional learning needs because of their diverse cognitive, behavioral, and linguistic abilities. Candidates will examine the history of special education, legislation, and laws that support the educational rights of individuals with disabilities, their families, and caregivers. In addition, this course offers practical guidance for pre-service teachers to learn and apply classroom and behavior management techniques in both regular and special education settings. Field experiences are required. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Department Approval 

EDUC 312: Introduction to Assessment &Measurement 
This course is designed to provide pre-service and in-service teachers with basic competencies in educational assessment and measurement that can be used to improve instruction through better assessment of all students, including those with special needs. The point-of-view that instruction and assessment should blend together in the teaching/learning process will be emphasized throughout the course. Beginning teachers will learn how to: design various types of assessments; evaluate students and discuss evaluations with parents; interpret standardized and teacher-constructed assessment data; and use the information to improve teaching and learning. Issues related to validity, reliability, fairness, bias, and technology will be discussed. 
Credits: 
3 

EDUC 314: Principles of Teaching Math &Science in Urban Classrooms I 
This course provides candidates with knowledge, skills, and dispositions to deliver content-rich and rigorous mathematics and science instruction for African American and diverse urban learners in grades 1-3. Candidates will have opportunities to employ a variety of instructional strategies to integrate math and science content and the Common Core State Standards through the Principles of Learning Mathematics and Science. Constructivist, behaviorist, cognitivist, and asset-based approaches and methodologies will be emphasized in this course. Field-based experiences will provide an opportunity for candidates to design, develop and implement evidence-based lessons in science and mathematics for national and global student populations. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
Department Approval 

EDUC 315: Principles of Teaching Math & Science in Urban Classrooms II 
This course provides candidates with knowledge, skills, dispositions and pedagogy to deliver content-rich, rigorous mathematics and science instruction for African American and diverse urban learners in grades 4 – 6. Candidates will have opportunities to employ a variety of instructional strategies to integrate mathematics and science content and the Common Core State Standards through the Principles of Learning Mathematics and Science. Constructivist, behaviorist, cognitivist, and asset-based approaches and methodologies will be emphasized during this course. Field-based experiences will provide an opportunity for candidates to design, develop and implement evidence-based lessons in science and mathematics for national and global student populations. 
Credits: 
4 

EDUC 316: Strategies for Teaching English Language Learners 
This course is designed to help teachers understand critical issues that influence the language learning and educational achievement of culturally and linguistically diverse students. The course will provide pre-service candidates without a background in ELL pedagogy with rudimentary information about the characteristics of non-native speakers, the influence of English language acquisition on student performance and classroom interactions, and best-practice, instructional strategies that can enable them to successfully access core curriculum and achieve high academic outcomes. 
Credits: 
3 

EDUC 321: Literature &Writing in Urban, Elementary Schools 
This course addresses the functions of literature in child development, criteria for selecting literature for children, and methods of using children’s literature in the classroom. Candidates will explore oral and written literary traditions and the major genres and types of children’s literature. Candidates will plan and present classroom activities with a specific emphasis on curriculum integration and the use of asset-based approaches for developing the literary and writing skills of urban, culturally and linguistically diverse elementary school students. 
Credits: 
3 

EDUC 322: Teaching Language Arts and Social Studies in Urban Elementary Schools 
This course provides pre-service candidates with knowledge, skills, and dispositions they need to provide evidence-based instruction in literacy and social studies to African American and other diverse learners in inclusive, urban, elementary school settings. The course employs a balanced approach to teaching language arts and social studies that includes multiple methods of instruction and technology. The course emphasizes the use of asset-based theories and applications to provide elementary students with culturally affirming instruction in reading, writing, speaking, listening, and social studies. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Department Approval 

EDUC 323: Literacy Assessment &Instructional Frameworks in Urban, Elem Schools 
This course provides pre-service/in-service candidates with knowledge, skills, and dispositions to assess and support the literacy development of African American and diverse learners in grades 1-6 in urban settings. Candidates will engage in practical experiences for diagnosing, monitoring, preventing, and remediating literacy difficulties using a range of formal and informal reading assessments. Emphasis on asset-based theories and applications will provide candidates with instructional approaches for enhancing literacy achievement. 
Credits: 
3 

EDUC 324: Teaching Social Studies, Arts, Health and PE in Urban Elem Schools 
This course focuses on the aims, scope, and integration of methods for teaching the Arts, Health and Physical Education across the curriculum. The course utilizes a constructivist approach to teaching and learning that enables candidates to devise, select, and implement effective instructional strategies for developing diverse learners’ knowledge and skills in the arts, health education and physical education. A considerable field experience component is included. 
Credits: 
4 

EDUC 410: Pedagogy &Content Literacy 
This course emphasizes research-based teaching and learning principles for achieving content-specific and broader outcomes. Moreover, this course focuses on helping candidates to prepare students to handle content literacy demands of the discipline. Methods, strategies, technology, and program models appropriate for secondary students are explored. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Department Approval 

EDUC 412: Research Foundations &Methods for Classroom Teachers 
This course is designed to equip candidates with the knowledge, skills, and dispositions that are essential to functioning as competent researchers, with a specific emphasis on teacher-led research. By providing multiple experiences that enable candidates to evaluate and conduct educational research, the course broadens candidates’ knowledge of literature related to current trends in curriculum and teaching, increases their ability to generate sound educational research, and facilitates their development as reflective professionals and educational change agents. As a final course requirement, candidates will plan, implement, analyze, and interpret the results of an action research project. 
Credits: 
3 

EDUC 420: Interdisciplinary Research in STEM 
This course facilitates candidates’ ability to develop science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) related research projects using tools, models, and theories from a variety of disciplines, emphasizing knowledge of multiple perspectives and research methodologies. Candidates will form interdisciplinary research teams to explore the implications and impacts of interdisciplinary, transdisciplinary, and multi-disciplinary research in urban school settings. 
Credits: 
3 

EDUC 430: Methods and Instructional Technology 
This course also emphasizes the design and facilitation of learning environments that apply technology-enhanced instructional strategies to maximize student learning. Candidates will apply current research and instructional design principles to create 21st century learning experiences for students. 
Credits: 
3 

EDUC 450: Internship and Classroom Management. 
This course is the seminal clinical internship for prospective teachers and new teachers. The course is designed to prepare prospective and new teachers for teaching in the urban and diverse settings. Students are given opportunities to develop patterns of thinking and knowing with respect to an understanding of self as teacher. The internship is centered on the critical activities of teaching and learning – planning lessons, evaluating student work, developing curricula, and enforcing standards on a full-time basis. The internship provides an opportunity to better understand and discover practical applications of the INTASC Standards. The support seminar fosters analysis and communication of these understandings and discoveries. 
Credits: 
9 
- 
12 
Prerequisites: 
Department Approval. 

EDUC 450: Internship and Classroom Management. 
This course is the seminal clinical internship for prospective teachers and new teachers. The course is designed to prepare prospective and new teachers for teaching in the urban and diverse settings. Students are given opportunities to develop patterns of thinking and knowing with respect to an understanding of self as teacher. The internship is centered on the critical activities of teaching and learning – planning lessons, evaluating student work, developing curricula, and enforcing standards on a full-time basis. The internship provides an opportunity to better understand and discover practical applications of the INTASC Standards. The support seminar fosters analysis and communication of these understandings and discoveries. 
Credits: 
9 
- 
12 
Prerequisites: 
Department Approval. 

EDUC 480: International Internship &Special Topics Seminar 
International Internship &Special Topics Seminar. The course offers students the opportunity to integrate pedagogical and theoretical concepts related to teaching and learning in an international context. Candidates will develop global competencies and teaching skills via exposure to international students and educational environments. The seminar aspect of the course will employ online discussions, journal writing, and interdisciplinary readings to enrich candidates’ cross cultural experiences and facilitate their intercultural development. 
Credits: 
9 

Human Development 
HUDV 
HUDV 001: Freshman Orientation Seminar in Human Development 
Designed to provide incoming students with transition into college life and the academic structure of the human development major. 
Credits: 
1 

HUDV 004: Honors Directed Reading 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor 
Credits: 
1 

HUDV 006: Honors Undergraduate Research 
Instructor-guided instruction focused on the course topic.  Students are required to complete a significant research paper or project. 
Credits: 
1 

HUDV 008: Honors Thesis 
Support the the conceptualization and development of a thesis or capstone project  under the supervision of the faculty adviser. 
Credits: 
1 

HUDV 095: Human Development, Family, Culture and Society 
Provides a framework for understanding human development and family relations. 
Credits: 
3 

HUDV 113: Prenatal, Infancy and Early Childhood Development 
Examines developmental nature and determinants, conception to two years, emphasizing the environment. 
Credits: 
3 

HUDV 114: Growth and Development in Childhood and Adolescence 
Deals with growth and development from early childhood to early adolescence. 
Credits: 
3 

HUDV 118: Children and Adolescents Placed at Risk 
Examines development gone awry during infancy, childhood and adolescence from ecological, developmental, cultural, and other theoretical frameworks. 
Credits: 
3 

HUDV 119: Diverse Youth of Color 
Investigates contemporary environmental factors affecting the African American child, stressing strengths and meaningful curricula. 
Credits: 
3 

HUDV 120: Interdisciplinary Perspectives in Human Development 
Treats developmental theories and research, from infancy to adulthood. 
Credits: 
3 

HUDV 141: Risk and Resiliency in Families and Intimate Relationships. 
Explores the parameters and dynamics of female-male roles and the relationships and factors influencing marital and familial success. 
Credits: 
3 

HUDV 143: Parentology: Theory, Research, and Support Systems 
Examines parenting theory and research and its application to rearing healthy children. 
Credits: 
3 

HUDV 148: Research in Human Development 
Deals with methodologies and descriptive/inferential research for developmental models of life stages. 
Credits: 
3 

HUDV 149: Youth, Consumer Culture and the Earth 
Examines the needs of individual and families across the life span, from an ecological framework, and explores social forces and that influence development within society. 
Credits: 
3 

HUDV 150: Positive Aging in Adult Development 
Analysis of typical development and problems of behavioral and physiological changes in the aging process, with educational/counseling implications. 
Credits: 
3 

HUDV 151: Thanatology: Death and Dying 
The study of behavioral and emotional aspects of death and dying. 
Credits: 
3 

HUDV 169: Internship in Human Development 
Involves selective field experiences in infancy, childhood, adolescence, adulthood, aging, or parentology. 
Credits: 
6 

HUDV 191: Service Learning in Human Development 
Individual student service learning projects including community outreach, volunteer work, research, and field work. 
Credits: 
3 

HUDV 202: Honors First Semester Sem. I 
An instructor-led course, usually credit-bearing, with a small number of students collectively exploring  the human development major and the honors program. 
Credits: 
1 

HUDV 204: Honors Directed Readings 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
1 

HUDV 207: Honors Undergrad Research I 
A supervised study on a research project chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
1 

HUDV 209: Honors Thesis I 
Support the the conceptualization and development of a thesis or capstone project  under the supervision of the faculty adviser. 
Credits: 
1 

Civil Engineering 
CIEG 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
CIEG 102: Introduction to Civil Engineering 
Introduces the student to the disciplines within civil engineering and skills needed for success in the major and profession, including MathCAD. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EGPP 101. 

CIEG 104: Civil Engineering Software & Design 
Civil engineering involves the planning, design, construction, and operation of facilities that support the quality of life for all people, from road networks to water treatment systems to buildings and their foundations. This course will utilize a variety of teaching and learning techniques to introduce students to the civil engineering discipline, including the concentration areas of transportation, environmental, water resources, structural, and geotechnical engineering. Students will work individually to conduct research on civil engineering topics and familiarize themselves with skills/tools needed for success in the field including the following: technical writing, MathCAD, and AutoCAD. By the end of the course, students will be able to: Use MathLab, MathCAD and AutoCAD to complete basic engineering analyses and design. Identify and describe the civil engineering disciplines. Prepare and deliver effective oral presentations. Demonstrate technical writing competencies appropriate for civil engineering practice. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EGPP 101. 

CIEG 202: Statics 
Introduction to vectors, pseudo-graphical and analytical micro-computer aided resolution and composition of forces; equilibrium of collinear, concurrent, and non-concurrent two and three dimensional force systems, as applied to particles and rigid bodies. Coulomb friction; Hooke's law; introductory application of equilibrium, compatibility, and constitutive relations in the determination of forces moments, displacements and rotations of simple deformable bodies and biomechanical systems, using simple computer aids. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 157; PHYS 013. 

CIEG 207: Introduction to Environmental Engineering 
Introduces concepts in water supply, water and wastewater treatment, air quality, solid and hazardous waste management, and social and ethical considerations. Provides a brief history and background of environmental engineering. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 003. 

CIEG 301: Mechanics of Materials Lecture 
Introductory analysis of tension, compression and shear; analysis of stress and strain; ties, shafts, beams and columns; related laboratory experiments and computer applications; introduction to structural analysis and design. This course must be taken during the same semester as CIEG 301b, Mechanics of Materials Lab. Exceptions must be approved by Instructor prior to course registration. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 159; CIEG 302, Coreq.: MEEG 309. 

CIEG 302: Dynamics 
Study of motions of particles; particle systems, rigid bodies and simple deformable mass system; rectilinear and curvilinear kinematics; Newton's laws of motion and gravitation; work energy and impulse-momentum principles; conservation laws for energy and momentum; introduction to vibrations; computer-aided applications. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 202; Coreq.: MATH 159. 

CIEG 303: Mechanics of Materials Lab 
 Experimental laboratory to accompany Mechanics of Materials lecture. This course is a co-requisite of CIEG 301, Mechanics of Materials Lecture. 
Credits: 
1 

CIEG 311: Fluid Mechanics Lecture 
Theoretical studies of fluid properties, hydrostatics, and kinematics of fluid motion; continuity; Bernoulli; impulse-momentum; drag and resistance to flow laboratory studies. This course must be taken during the same semester as CIEG 311b, Fluid Mechanics Lab. Exceptions must be approved by Instructor prior to course registration. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 159; CIEG 302. 

CIEG 313: Fluid Mechanics Lab 
 Experimental laboratory to accompany Fluid Mechanics lecture. This course is a co-requisite of CIEG 311, Fluid Mechanics Lecture. 
Credits: 
1 

CIEG 314: Basic Structural Analysis 
Includes forms and concepts; statically determinate structures; and reactions, shears, moments, and deflections in beams, trusses, and frames. Introduction to design of simple elements and connections. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 301. 

CIEG 328: Unit Operations in Environmental Engineering 
Analysis and basic design of treatment facilities for the remediation of air, water and land pollution. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 207. 

CIEG 349: Analysis Methods in Civil Engineering 
The course includes a method in civil engineering including structural systems and basic analysis methods for beams, frames, and trusses. 
Credits: 
3 

CIEG 350: Engineering Economics 
Examines principles of accounting, time value of money, depreciation, taxes, retirement, and economic analysis of alternatives for use in personal finances and engineering projects. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 157. {Note: replaces Engineering Systems Analysis} 

CIEG 351: Probability and Statistics 
Stochastic and deterministic statistical modeling: probability and statistics for univariate analysis including probability density functions, confidence intervals and hypothesis testing. Probability and statistics for multivariate analysis including regression analysis, confidence intervals and hypothesis testing; PCA, ANOVA, and risk-based design concepts. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 158. 

CIEG 352: Water Resources Engineering I, 
Classical and statistical hydrology: hydrologic cycle, hydrologic processes, physical watershed characteristics, hydrologic modeling, collect analyze and interpret meteorological and hydrologic data using statistical analysis for design of hydrologic and hydraulic structures. Remote sensing data in hydrology. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 351. 

CIEG 354: Engineering Economics 
 Examines principles of accounting, time value of money, depreciation, taxes, retirement, and economic analysis of alternatives for use in personal finances and engineering projects. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 157 (Note: Replaces Engineering Systems Analysis) 

CIEG 400: Special Topics in Civil Engineering 
Presentation of material not normally available in regular course offerings or offering of new courses on a trial basis. Content determined by faculty member in consultation with the Department Chair. 
Credits: 
3 

CIEG 407: Intelligent Transportation Systems 
Command, controls and communications in modern multimodal transportation; infrastructure/highway and vehicle automation, advanced traffic management, vehicle control and safety systems; information data, and sensory requirements; practical application. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 416, CIEG 465 

CIEG 416: Transportation Engineering 
Involves planning and design of highways. Students work in teams during the preparation of the required design plans, cost estimates and project reports. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 207; CIEG 302; CIEG 350. 

CIEG 419: Structures II 
Theory of structural principles; determinacy and stability, approximate analysis of statically indeterminate structures; influence lines and moving loads; calculation of deflections; analysis of statically indeterminate structures using flexibility method. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 314. 

CIEG 420: Matrix Structural Analysis 
Continuation of analysis of statically indeterminate structures; moment distribution; introduction to matrix formulation of the direct stiffness method (emphasized) and the flexibility method (for reference); elementary finite element analysis techniques; introduction to nonlinear (plastic) analysis; structural stability; and structural dynamics. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 419 

CIEG 422: Steel Design 
Principles of structural design, loads, types of steels, tension members, columns, non-composite and composite beams, beam-columns, column base plates, and simple bolted and welded connections. The use of the AISC LRFD specification is emphasized and a comprehensive group design project is assigned. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 314. 

CIEG 433: Foundations 
Based on the principles of soil mechanics, fluid mechanics, and solid mechanics, covers the bearing capacity and settlement analysis of shallow and mat foundations, an introduction to deep foundations, and design of earth retaining structures. Analytical, empirical, and computational methods are used. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 434. 

CIEG 434: Soil Mechanics Lecture 
Provides for appreciation and understanding of the engineering properties of soils and how they relate to design and construction, including soil identification and classification. This course must be taken during the same semester as CIEG 434b, Soil Lab. Exceptions must be approved by Instructor prior to course registration. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 301, CIEG 311; Corequisite: CIEG 438 

CIEG 435: Reinforced Concrete 
Theory and design of reinforced concrete structural members and entire structural systems according to the ACI Building Code Requirements. The students will apply fundamentals and basic design procedures to reinforced concrete members (beams, slabs, columns and footings). 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 314. 

CIEG 438: Soil Mechanics Lab 
This laboratory course accompanies the Soil Mechanics lecture. Example tests are permeability, shear strength, and consolidation. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Corequisite: CIEG 434 or instructor approval. 

CIEG 439: Senior Design I 
This course is concerned with the planning, management, teaming and project development phase for the culminating design to be covered in CIEG 44. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 314; CIEG 328; CIEG 350; CIEG 352; CIEG 416; CIEG 434. 

CIEG 440: Water and Wastewater Treatment 
Advanced design of facilities for water and wastewater treatment including design ranges, regulations, economics and ethics of environmental design. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 328. 

CIEG 441: Senior Design II 
The capstone design project integrates the many sub-disciplines of civil engineering into a single project. Beginning with a specification, the process passes through preliminary and detailed design culminating in a written report and verbal presentation. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 439. 

CIEG 442: Advanced Foundations 
ase histories are presented to illustrate typical design and construction problems. Further coverage includes deep foundations and soil exploration and improvement techniques. Focus is placed on behavior, which departs from traditional foundation design expectations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 433. 

CIEG 445: Undergraduate Research 
Requires a student to conduct research under the directives of an instructor. Students must seek and receive the approval of the instructor prior to enrollment in this course. The selected research topic must broaden the student's understanding of one of the five emphasis areas. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 351; Approval of Instructor. 

CIEG 457: Advanced Hydrology 
Students model the hydrologic cycle and hydrologic processes to learn about and apply hydraulic models such as those hosted by the WMS (Watershed Modeling System) software, including the US Army Corps HEC-1 model and the SCS TR-20 and TR-55 models. GIS software ArcView and one of its extensions WMSHydro.avx are also used to prepare data for use in WMS models. 
Credits: 
3 

CIEG 462: Seminar 
 Forum for presentation of current topics of interest in civil engineering by individuals from industry, government and practice. Co-req.: CIEG 441. 
Credits: 
1 

CIEG 463: Water Resources Planning 
Presents basic concepts in the planning of water resources development systems; analytical techniques, basic information required for planning; and examples for planning flood control, wastewater management, and water supply systems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Senior status. 

CIEG 464: Engineering Project Management 
Involves planning performing and controlling of engineering projects; introduces management roles, principles and procedures, as well as project proposal writing. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 350 or equivalent. {Note: CIEG 350 Engineering Systems Analysis is now Engineering Economics.} 

CIEG 465: Traffic Engineering 1 
Involves the collection and use of traffic engineering data and introduces students to traffic operations and safety. Students use software for capacity analysis and signal optimization. Students are required to prepare reports. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 351; 416 

CIEG 466: Traffic Engineering II 
 Involves the introduction to traffic impact analysis, and use of traffic simulation models for evaluating traffic operation on highway networks, including traffic impact studies and signal warrant analyses. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 465. 

Computer Science 
CSCI 120: Explorations in Computer Science 
Provides an overview of the field of computer science, introducing students to key concepts in computing and "computational thinking." 
Credits: 
2 

CSCI 136: Computer Science II 
Course exposes students to the software development life cycle with a focus on the concepts and use of the object-oriented paradigm in problem analysis, solution design, software development and implementation. This course is designed to enhance the student’s ability to engineer software that is efficient, maintainable and cost efficient over its entire life cycle. Data abstraction is discussed in depth and students gain experience in the use of classes, object and member functions.  Students gain an understanding of the development of reusable abstract data types.  Software reuse is emphasized and object-oriented concepts are used throughout the course. O-notation and the complexity of algorithms are discussed at relevant points in the course 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI   135 (with a grade of 'C' or better. 

CSCI 201: Computer Organization I 
This course will cover the fundamentals required to understand the relationship between computer hardware and software. Topics include data representation on computers, computer arithmetic, Boolean algebra and digital logic, and assembly programming in MIPS 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 135. 

CSCI 202: Computer Organization II 
This course will present the relationship between computer hardware and software, and the fundamental knowledge essential for understanding and designing the operations of computer systems. Topics include performance evaluation, non-pipelined and pipelined datapath, memory hierarchies, and I/O devices 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 201 

CSCI 203: Object-Oriented Programming Using Java 
This course provides an introduction to Java programming and object-oriented programming concepts for students with previous programming experience in C/C++. The course provides a comprehensive overview of basic programming concepts in the Java programming language using an object-oriented approach. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 135 

CSCI 211: Unix Lab 
This course will present the basic concepts of LINUX and UNIX operating systems. Topics that will be examined include Vi editor, Linux Command, directories, Disks and File systems, Users and Groups, File Permissions, Processes, file compression, basic network use, manage files, create and modify files, and Shell script. 
Credits: 
1 

CSCI 212: Linux Lab 
his course will present the basic concepts of LINUX and UNIX operating systems. Topics that will be examined include Vi editor, Linux Command, directories, Disks and File systems, Users and Groups, File Permissions, Processes, file compression, basic network use, manage files, create and modify files, and Shell script. 
Credits: 
1 

CSCI 263: Web Makers 
Interested in learning web development but not sure where to start? Come join web makers and you will have your first web server up in one class! In this class, students will start with the basics and work up to a deep dive into making for the web. Students will be learning HTML, CSS and Javascript. This class will be about creation and students will become the maker. While no previous knowledge of web development is required, makers will be expected to have a working knowledge of programming concepts. Makers must be motivated to explore the syntactic nuances of these languages independently. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 100 or some programming experience. 

CSCI 341: Theory of Computation 
Introduction to the classical theory of computer science. A study of the formal relationships between machines, languages and grammars; we will cover regular, context-free, context-sensitive, recursive and recursive enumerable languages. Sequential machines and their applications to devices, processes, and programming. Models of computation: finite state automata, push down automata, Turing machines. The role of non-determinism 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 136 and Discrete Structures. 

CSCI 350: Structure of Programming Languages 
The course will teach students the basic components of the design and analysis of computer programming languages as well as the fundamental computation theory that is required to understand those concepts. The course will also cover several non-imperative languages (unlike C, such as LISP and Prolog) to expose students to the diversity of programming languages. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 201, CSCI 341 

CSCI 354: Computer Science III 
The course continues the study of data structures and algorithms, focusing on algorithmic design and problem analysis and the relationships between data representation, algorithm design, and program efficiency. Topics include advanced data structures, key algorithm design techniques, analysis of the time and space requirements of algorithms, and the subsequent development of solution of systems. Concrete examples will be drawn from a variety of domains, such as algorithms for trees and graphs, indexing and search, and real-world problems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 136 (with a 'C' or better) 

CSCI 363: Large Scale Programming 
This course will introduce the students to applications and systems in the large scale. Students will be introduced to the object-oriented method to software design using UML and will apply the object-oriented design/analysis techniques of UML to a realistic Java application. Students will gain familiarity with managing larger projects and OOA/D. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 136 

CSCI 364: Web Services 
Presents  topics in distributed computing with particular emphasis on Web Services using Microsoft .NET Framework.  Also discussion on layered protocols, the client-server model, remote procedure call.  Students program extensively in C# and Visual Basic .NET. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Co-requisites: 306-401 Operating Systems 

CSCI 365: Cloud Computing 
Cloud Computing provides the modern on-demand services for management and usage of large and shared computing resources including storage, computations, and communications. This course will cover in-depth knowledge for Cloud Computing and the practical experience in designing and implementing large-scale and composite business web applications on Cloud Computing platform. 
Credits: 
2 

CSCI 375: Software Engineering 
This course will introduce students to the basic concepts of software engineering and the software development life cycle. The course will cover methodological techniques for software specification, design, implementation, testing, verification, and documentation. The course will also present the use of state-of-the-art tools for computer-aided software engineering (CASE). 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 354 

CSCI 376: Operations Research 
Methodology for planning, analyzing and evaluating optimal systems: identifying and structuring objectives and defining performance requirements that influence the design of the system. Synthesizing and analyzing alternative solutions and applying optimization techniques for the optimum queuing system. Applications to real world systems with open and closed queues with emphasis on computer systems using microcomputer software packages. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 375 

CSCI 379: Introduction to Human Computer Interaction 
Students will learn the fundamental concepts of human-computer interaction and user-centered design thinking, through working in teams on an interaction design project, supported by lectures, readings, and discussions. They will learn to evaluate and design usable and appropriate software based on psychological, social, and technical analysis. They will become familiar with the variety of design and evaluation methods used in interaction design, and will get experience with these methods in their project. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 354 

CSCI 383: Introduction to Affective Biometrics 
Affective computing represents a broad, interdisciplinary research and practice area focusing on a range of topics, including: computational models of emotion, cognitive-affective architectures, affective user modeling; emotion sensing and recognition; emotion expression; and the use of emotions to improve human-computer interaction across a range of contexts including health informatics and immersive environments. This course will provide an introduction to affective computing and human-computer interaction through a combination of lectures, student presentations of selected literature, projects and class discussions. The course content and format will be appropriate for computer science, cognitive science, psychology, human factors, and industrial engineering students (advanced undergraduate/graduate). Students in this course will design an experimental study to examine how emotional states like stress, anxiety, frustration, anger, and/or depression can be measured through the use of mobile applications. At the end of the course, students will be paired with a student from the Architecture Department class called Immersive Environments to perform a study on how to design immersive environments to reduce stress, anxiety, frustration, anger, and/or depression. 
Credits: 
3 

CSCI 390: Ethical & Social Impact of Computing 
This course will present the foundations of ethics in the context of computing. The broader social impact of computing and technology in general will also be reviewed. Areas of specific focus will include technology and human values, costs and benefits of technology, the character of technological change, and the social context of work in computer science and information technology. 
Credits: 
3 

CSCI 400: Computer & Network Forensics I 
Computer and Network Forensics I is the first course in the two semester series on computer and network forensics, and focuses on computer system forensics (while the second course on network forensics). It consists of three major components: assembly level reverse engineering (to understand the logic of a program given only machine code), file system forensics (to find traces of past activities on data stored in nonvolatile storage) and memory forensics (to find traces of past stalactites on data stored in volatile storage). It will also briefly discuss the law aspect of digital forensics. In order to understand the materials, students are expected to have the following prerequisites: good programming skills in both high level (preferably C/C++) and assembly level, operating systems and basic familiarity with Linux and Windows. 
Credits: 
3 

CSCI 401: Operating Systems 
This course will present the basic concepts of operating systems. Topics that will be examined include processes and interprocess communication/synchronization, virtual memory, program loading and linking system calls and system programs; interrupt handling, device and memory management, process scheduling, deadlock and the trade-offs in the design of large-scale multitasking operating systems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 202; CSCI 363 

CSCI 402: Mobile Application Development 
This course will introduce students to developing applications which target mobile devices. Students will be introduced to many issues unique to mobile applications, including synchronization, remote data access, security and sometimes-connected networks. They will research topics in these areas and develop a significant project which demonstrates their knowledge and understanding of these issues. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 354 

CSCI 403: Introduction to Big Data Analysis 
The primary goal of big data analytics is to analyze large volume of data. The analysis of big data requires the organization, storage, and processing of data at a scalable and efficient way which goes beyond the capabilities of traditional information technologies. In this course, we will cover modern massive data analysis technologies including different platforms, models, and languages, we will also look at real world applications and how they can be implemented on big data platforms. Topics in this course include: Map reduce/Hadoop, NoSQL stores, languages such as Pig Latin and JAQL, large-scale data mining and visualization. It will include programming projects that will provide students with hands-on experience on building data-intensive applications using existing big data tools and platforms. 
Credits: 
3 

CSCI 410: Modeling & Simulation 
Introduces the fundamentals of system design and modeling. Emphasizes advantages and limitations of various modeling techniques for different applications. Introduces probability distributions typical of queuing models and presents in-depth discussions and experiments with existing simulation packages. 
Credits: 
3 

CSCI 421: Computer & Video Game Dev 
The course will span the software domains embedded in computer and video games. Topics such as game computational infrastructure, design, engines, and motion will be presented through discussion and assignments.  Game industry guest speakers will discuss software challenges and opportunities. Students completing this course will understand the software development process required to create a successful game and possess the programming expertise to create a simple game. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 354, CSCI 375 

CSCI 422: Game Engine Programming 
Game engine programming is introduced as a critical element in compelling game creation.  Programming activity will feature input capture, world integration, object motion, collision detection and audio scoring. Game performance metrics, code optimization and quality assurance testing procedures will be emphasized.  Code examples will be presented from XNA game studio and Torque. Course game project may be completed using a 2D or 3D game engine of choice including Torque, Gamestudio, Panda3D, or OGRE 3D rendering engine. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 421 

CSCI 430: Computer & Network Forensics II 
This class will discuss advanced computer forensics topics and network forensics. knowledge points include virtual machine forensics, mobile device forensics, cloud forensics, email and social media investigation, network traffic capture and analysis, network application log analysis 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 450; CSCI 211 

CSCI 432: Database Systems 
This course will present the basic concepts of database systems. Topics that will be covered include basic relational database theory, relational database modeling, relational database design and implementation, normalization, transaction management, the SQL language and other languages and facilities provided by database management systems 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 354 

CSCI 433: Introduction to Database Security 
An overview of both the theory of and applications for providing effective security in database management systems. Topics include conceptual frameworks for discretionary and mandatory access control, data integrity, availability and performance, secure database design, data aggregation, data inference, secure concurrency control, and secure transactions processing. Models for multilevel secure databases for both relational and object-relational databases are analyzed. Assignments focus on database security concepts. 
Credits: 
3 

CSCI 440: Object-Oriented Programming 
Introduces the fundamentals of object-oriented information system development with a focus on analysis and design phases. Data modeling and design principles such as data abstraction, information hiding, modularity, and coupling are viewed in the context of object-oriented paradigm. For object-oriented modeling Unified Modeling Language (UML) is introduced and used extensively throughout the course. Issues relating to making the transition from other software development methodologies are examined and risks involved in object-oriented process are discussed. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 354 

CSCI 449: Computer Networks 
This course teaches the concepts and general principles of the underlying networks of the Internet. 
Credits: 
3 

CSCI 450: Data Comm & Network Prog 
This is an introductory course on computer networking. It will cover the layering model of the Internet. The upper four layers (application, transport, network and data link) will be discussed in details with dominant networking protocols and algorithms introduced. Students will also learn how to do basic programming on the Internet. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 354, CSCI 201, CSCI 470, Discrete Structures 

CSCI 451: Applied Wireless Networking 
This course covers applied wireless networking principles from a historical, current, and future perspective. Topics that will be examined include wireless cellular networks 1G, 2G, 2.5G, 3G, 4G (LTE), and future 5G networks, IEEE wireless specifications 802.11 wireless LANs (Wi-Fi), 802.15 (WPAN, Bluetooth, UWB, ZIgBee, Mesh network), IEEE 802.16 (WiMAX), IEEE 802.20 (Mobile broadband wireless access), IEEE 802.21 (Media Independent Handover), (IEEE 802.22) Wireless Regional Area Networks, addressing and routing to mobile users, mobility management, quality of service, wireless multiplexing techniques, and wireless security. 
Credits: 
3 

CSCI 452: Network & Web Programming 
This class will introduce (1) network programming, writing applications that communicate with each other via TCP/UDP sockets, and (2) Web programming, writing applications that are accessible through a Web Browser over the Hypertext Transport Protocol (HTTP). For web programming, both client side and server side programming will be covered. The LAMP stack (Linux, Apache, MySQL, and PHP) will be used for server side, Javascript and CSS will be covered for client side. HTML will be taught before studying programming. As prerequisites, programming skills are needed. Light database experience is preferred but not required 
Credits: 
3 

CSCI 453: Intro to Cyber Security I 
Computer Security Overview. Malware and Cyberwarfare. Passwords. Biometrics. Access Controls. Multilevel Security. Multilateral Security. Firewalls. Intrusion Detection . Cryptography Before 1970. Symmetric Key Cryptography. The Data Encryption Standard (DES). The Public Key Paradigm. Knapsacks. The RSA Approach to Public Key Cryptology. Elliptic Curve Cryptography. The Advanced Encryption Standard (Rijndael). Hash Functions. The Digital Signature Standard 
Credits: 
3 

CSCI 454: Intro to Cyber Security II 
Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS). Hash Functions. SHA-3 and Keccak. Network Security. Network attack and defense. Steganography . Software security I. Software flaws. Malware. Miscellaneous software-based attacks. Software security II. Software reverse engineering. Software tamper resistance. Digital rights management. Software development. Stuxnet and Cyberwarfare. Advanced encryption techniques. Elliptic Curves and Elliptic Curve Cryptography. Electronic voting. Quantum cryptography. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 453 

CSCI 460: Advanced Systems Administration 
Advanced system administration course provides a strong practical experience to Linux and Solaris operating systems. The course includes topics such as Samba (Windows file and print sharing), Email, Web serving with Apache, remote access, networking setup, Internet proxy services, fire wall and security administration, deploy LDAP in a Linux, Solaris and windows environment and also compile, configure and patch  a Kernel module. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 211 

CSCI 470: Fundamentals of Algorithms 
Techniques for designing efficient algorithms, analyzing their complexity and applying these algorithms to a broad range of application settings. Methods for recognizing and dealing with hard problems are studied. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 354 

CSCI 472: Systems Management Analysis 
This course presents methodology for large-scale system design and analysis using modern semantic analysis techniques. Identification and definition of large-scale (community/industrial-based) problems. Discusses how to select and quantify measures of the severity of the problem. Presents different techniques for modeling alternative solutions to problems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 375 

CSCI 473: Applied Data Science 
This course is an introduction to probability and statistical concepts and their applications in solving real-world problems. This prerequisite course provides a solid background in the application of probability and statistics that will form the basis for advanced data science methods. Statistical concepts, probability theory, random and multivariate variables, data and sampling distributions, descriptive statistics, and hypothesis testing will be covered. The use of computer-based applications for the performance of basic statistics will be utilized. 
Credits: 
3 

CSCI 474: Computational Biology 
Introduces computational methods for understanding biological systems at the molecular level. Problem areas such as mapping and sequencing, sequence analysis, structure prediction, phylogenic inference, regulatory analysis. Techniques such as dynamic programming, Markov models, expectation-maximization, local search. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 470; MATH 189 

CSCI 475: Intro to Machine Learning 
Techniques for learning from data and applying these algorithms to application settings. Topics covered include Bayesian methods, linear classifiers such as the perceptron, regression, and non-parametric methods such as k-nearest neighbors. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 354; MATH 189 

CSCI 476: Introduction to Artificial Intelligence 
This course will introduce students to contemporary topics in artificial intelligence. Topics that will be examined include basic AI concepts, representations, and techniques used in building practical computational systems (agents) that appear to display artificial intelligence, through the use of adaptive information processing algorithms. During the semester students will learn general knowledge representation techniques and problem solving strategies. Topics will include search, intelligent agents, game playing and rule-based systems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 350 

CSCI 478: Engineering Economic System Design 
Presents methodology for system design. Methodology begins with identification and definition of private sector problems to which solutions are justified by economics. Discusses selection of appropriate economic measures for comparing alternative solutions such as present worth, equivalent annual cost, cost/benefit ratio, life cycle cost, return on investment pay back period. Presents different techniques for modeling alternative solutions to the problems and predicting cost. Other topics discussed include decision-making, system implementation, operations and retirement 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 376 

CSCI 480: Digital Media & Multimedia Applications 
This course provides an introduction to digital media fundamentals including audio, video formats, storage and delivery. Windows Media and other technology will be extensively utilized as a method for digital content manipulation, rights management and internet transfer. Students will be exposed to basic internet architecture, operations and useful world wide web (WWW) resources. In addition, a practical understanding of digital computational devices, communication ports and connection cables will be acquired. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior Standing. 

CSCI 491: Senior Project I 
Allows the senior student the opportunity to demonstrate his or her knowledge of systems engineering and computer science principles by application to a class project of his or her choosing, with the guidance and supervision of a faculty member. The student develops a proposal for the project, followed by an architectural design and detailed design, all of which must be presented in class 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 202 

CSCI 492: Senior Project II 
In part two, the senior student develops and implements the system solution to the proposed project. The system, most commonly comprising computer software, hardware, procedures, etc., is implemented and tested in the department's Systems Development Laboratory. The student is required to demonstrate the system solution to the faculty and the student body of the department. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 491 

CSCI 493: The Lean LaunchPad: Technology Entrepreneurship & Lean Startups 
This course provides real world, hands-on learning on what it’s like to actually start a high-tech company. This class is not about how to write a business plan. It’s not an exercise on how smart you are in a classroom, or how well you use the research library to size markets. And the end result is not a Power Point slide deck for a VC presentation. And it is most definitely not an incubator where you come to build the.hot-idea that you have in mind. This is a practical class–essentially a lab, not a theory or.book class. Our goal, within the constraints of a class room and a limited amount of time, is to create an entrepreneurial experience for you with all of the pressures and demands of the real world in an early stage startup. You will be getting your hands dirty talking to customers, partners, competitors, as you encounter the chaos and uncertainty of how a startup actually works. You’ll work in teams learning how to turn a great idea into a great company. You’ll learn how to use a business model to brainstorm each part of a company and customer development to get out of the classroom to see whether any one other than you would want/use your product. Finally, based on the customer and market feedback gathered, you would use agile development to rapidly iterate your product to build something customers would actually use and buy. Every day will be a new adventure outside the classroom as you test each part of your business model and then share the hard earned knowledge with the rest of the class 
Credits: 
3 

CSCI 498: Special Topics: Robotic Programming 
The primary focus of this course will be behavior-based robotics, which uses semi-autonomous artificial intelligence modules for planning. Behavior-based robots use sensor information to react to changes in an environment, instead of complicated internal models. Higher level concepts that will be covered include multi-robot communication, robot localization and path planning. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior Standing, MEEG, ECEG, CSCI major 

Computer Science 
Department of Computer Science 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
CSCI 100: Intro to Computer Science 
This course introduces the fundamentals of systems and computer science. A brief examination of critical, creative, systems and scientific thinking, is followed by more details on computational thinking. The focus is hands on computing exercises and group exercises that stress the importance of algorithms and problem solving. Students are exposed to the research agenda of the department, the different track options and career opportunities along the different tracks. 
Credits: 
3 

CSCI 135: Computer Science I 
This course provides an introduction to the discipline of computer programming. Closed laboratory to reinforce lecture topics and introduce new topics. Course is designed to expose students to basic programming concepts and to the use of the C++ language. This course is designed to enhance the student’s ability to design, develop and test/debug programs. Each student will increase his or her skill in writing correct and maintainable programs. Emphasis will be placed on problem analysis and on the subsequent development of algorithms. Several standard data types will be discussed and the student will gain an understanding of the issues relating to the use, design and implementation of each type in C++. A major focus of the lectures will be to provide an overview of real-world problem solving concepts and top-down software design.  Prereq: Intro. to Computer Science. 
Credits: 
4 

CSCI 165: Scientific Computing for Eng 
Introduces programming and use of digital computers through symbolic programming. Programming includes general problem-solving and the systematic development of algorithms; use includes the coding of programs and practical experience in Maxima or Matlab. 
Credits: 
3 

Electrical Engineering 
EECE 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
EECE 102: Introduction to Electrical & Computer Engineering 
Continuation of EGPP 101 as related to the electrical and computer engineering profession. Organized in to five Blocks: Descriptive, Environment, Technical, Practical (Hands on), and Projects, students are introduced to various engineering issues related to the profession of electrical and computer engineering. Historical perspectives and Electrical Engineering Education/Profession and Design are reviewed. Ethics, social/ environmental/cultural/religious issues facing electrical engineers in a global work environment are discussed. An overview of electrical engineering discipline and five major classifications of electrical systems in communication, computer, control, power, and signal processing are presented. Technical aspects and safety considerations of a typical electrical engineering laboratory are introduced. A capstone term project requires assembling an electrical system (e.g., a robot kit) and its study and presentation from a systems point of view. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
EGPP-101. Course Offering: Spring Semester 

EECE 156: Math I Lab 
The purpose of this course is to develop students' problem solving skills, and improve their understanding of the calculus techniques and concepts they learn in Math 156 (Calculus I). Topics include: Algebra Review, Limits, Continuity, Derivative: definition, rules: sum, quotient, product, power, chain, Implicit Differentiation, Applications of the Derivative: related rates, max/min problems, L’Hospital’s Rule, Anti-derivative, Integration. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Corequisite MATH 156. Offered Fall and Spring Semesters 

EECE 157: Math Lab II 
The purpose of this course is to further develop students' problem solving skills, improve their understanding of the calculus techniques and concepts they learn in Math 157 (Calculus II), and help them see how calculus can be used to solve engineering problems. Topics include: integration techniques, applications of integration, polar functions and parametric functions, sequences and series. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 156, MATH 157. Offered Fall and Spring Semesters. 

EECE 158: Math Lab III 
The purpose of this course is to further develop students' problem solving skills, improve their understanding of the calculus techniques and concepts they learn in Math 158 (Calculus III), and help them see how calculus can be used to solve engineering problems. Topics include: Vectors and scalars, Dot and Cross Product, Vector Differentiation, Gradient, Divergence, and Curl, Vector Integration, Divergence Theorem, and Stokes’ Theorem. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 157; Corequisite MATH 158. Course offered Fall and Spring semesters. 

EECE 160: Engineering Mathematics 
Course introduction; history and importance of engineering Mathematics, trigonometry in engineering, 2-D vectors in engineering, complex numbers in engineering, 3-D vectors in engineering, systems of equations in engineering, application of derivatives in engineering, application of integrals in engineering, solving differential equation, applications of differential equations in engineering, Laplace transforms and applications, Interdisciplinary Applications. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 157.  Offered Spring Semester. 

EECE 200: Introduction to Computer Engineering 
Introduction to key concepts in computer organization. Discussion of number representations, switching circuits, logic design, microprocessor design, assembly language programming, input/output, interrupts and traps, direct memory access, structured program development. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 022 , MATH 156, PHYS 013. Co-requisite: EECE 206. Course Offering: Fall Semester 

EECE 202: Network Analysis I 
Includes Ohm's and Kirchoff's Laws: V-I laws for RLC elements, circuit analysis tools, Thevenin and Norton's theorems, Response of RC, LC and RLC circuits, operational amplifiers, and introduction to PSPICE. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 157, and PHYS 014. Co-requisite: MATH 159 and EECE 208. Course Offering: Spring Semester 

EECE 203: Fundamentals of Circuit Theory 
Understanding of basic circuit theory, circuit theorems, dc, ac circuits, magnetic circuits, transients, Laplace and Fourier transforms, Fourier series, electric devices, 2-port network, basic filters and op-amps. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
PHYS 014; PHYS 024. Corequisite EECE 209. Offered Spring Semester. 

EECE 206: Introduction to Computer Engineering Laboratory 
Laboratory with experiments designed to provide an overview of computer engineering: Covers fundamental concepts, digital circuits, and assembly language programming. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL- 022, MATH 156 and PHYS 013. Co-requisite: EECE 200. Course Offering: Fall Semester 

EECE 208: Introduction to Electrical Laboratory 
Hands-on experience in using electronic lab instrumentation. Lab experiments illustrate Ohm's and Kirchhoff's laws, Thevenin and Norton's theorems for resistive circuits. Transient and frequency response of RC circuits. Diodes, operational amplifiers, transistors, basic digital logic gates. Every lab session includes hardware measurement and PSPICE simulation. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 157, and PHYS 014. Co-requisite: EECE 202. Course Offering: Fall and Spring Semesters (mainly for non-EE and non-CE majors) 

EECE 209: Fundamentals of Circuit Theory Lab 
Understanding of hands-on labs associated basic circuit theory, circuit theorems, dc, ac circuits, operational amplifiers (op-amps), electric devices network, basic filters and op-amps. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
PHYS 014, PHYS 024. Co-requisite EECE 203. Offered Spring Semester 

EECE 211 [Old 311]: Digital Systems Design, 
Introduction to hardware building blocks used in digital computers and systems. Introduces number systems (including binary, octal and hexadecimal), Boolean algebra, two-level/multilevel logic minimization/simplification using K-Maps and Quine-McCluskey methods, combinational logic circuit design and implementation with available SSI, MSI, and programmable logic devices (PAL, PLA, multiplexers, encoders, ROMS). Practical considerations such as hazard and glitches are treated. Basics of sequential logic design including latches, flip-flops, registers, counters, finite state machines design, minimization, and implementation are presented. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore Standing for EE Students. 

EECE 212: Fundamentals of Digital Systems 
Introduction to hardware building blocks used in digital computers and systems. Introduces number systems (including binary, octal and hexadecimal), Boolean algebra, two-level/multilevel logic minimization/simplification using K-Maps and Quine-McCluskey methods, combinational logic circuit design and implementation with available SSI, MSI, and programmable logic devices (PAL, PLA, multiplexers, encoders, ROMS). Practical considerations such as hazard and glitches are treated. Basics of sequential logic design including latches, flip-flops, registers, counters, finite state machines design, minimization, and implementation are presented. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore Standing. Co-requisite: EECE 217. Offered Spring Semester 

EECE 218: Fundamentals of Digital Systems Design Laboratory 
Laboratory experiments and (mini) projects in design and implementation of simplex to moderately complex combinational and sequential logic circuits provide a practical understanding of concepts covered in EECE 211. Project(s) introduce students to design with programmable logic devices and logic design/simulation software such as Electronics Workbench. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore Standing. Co-requisite: EECE 217. Offered Spring Semester 

EECE 260: Engineering Programming & Application 
Use basic applications in engineering to bring up the major concepts, methods and techniques needed to perform successful computation. The course includes complexity, testing and debugging, binary search, divide and conquer, dynamic programming, application to statistics and Monte Carlo simulations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CSCI 135. Offered Spring Semester 

EECE 301: Network Analysis II, 
Deals with transient response of RLC circuits, phase transformations, polyphase circuits, complex power, magnetically coupled circuits, sinusoidal steady-state power calculations, Laplace transformations, inverse Laplace transformations, frequency response, transfer functions, s-domain circuit analysis, frequency selective circuits. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 202. Course Offering: Fall Semester 

EECE 304: Electromagnetic Theory and Applications 
Electric fields, flux and potential; Coulomb's Poisson's and Gauss's laws; permittivity and conductivity, magnetostatics, magnetic materials, magnetic materials and forces, Biot-Savart law and time varying fields, Maxwell's equations in integral and differential forms, time-domain analysis of waves. Application of electromagnetic theory to transmission lines. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 158, PHYS 014. Course Offering: Fall Semester 

EECE 305: Fundamental: Electromagnetics 
Electric fields, flux and potential; Coulomb's Poisson's and Gauss's laws; permittivity and conductivity, magnetostatics, magnetic materials, magnetic materials and forces, Biot-Savart law and time varying fields, Maxwell's equations in integral and differential forms, time-domain analysis of waves. Application of electromagnetic theory to transmission lines. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 158, PHYS 014. Offered Fall Semester. 

EECE 306: Fundamental: Electromagnetics Lab 
To provide ECE majors with a firm basis for an understanding of the electrical circuits, the radiation, propagation, and transmission of electric power, as well as the electromagnetic storage systems. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Co-requisite: EECE 305. Offered Fall Semester. 

EECE 307: Electronics I 
Theoretical analysis of the electronics components: diodes, BJT, JFET, MOSFET, OP-AMPs, and detailed analysis of their use in electronic circuits. DC bias, AC analysis and design of regulated DC power supplies, single stage amplifiers and active filters are the sample real world electronic circuits used throughout the course to illustrate the theoretical material presented. One individual design project is required. Homework requires theoretical derivations and PSPICE simulation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 202. Co-requisite: EECE 313. Course Offering: Fall Semester 

EECE 308: Electronics II 
Theoretical analysis and design of differential and multi-stage amplifiers, feedback, power amplifiers, frequency response, Nyquist and Bode plots, active filters and tuned amplifiers, signal generators. The covered sample electronic circuits combine diodes, BJT, JFET, MOSFET and OP-AMPS. One individual design project is required. Homework requires theoretical derivations and PSPICE simulation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 307. Co-requisite: EECE 314. Course Offering: Spring Semester 

EECE 309: Fundamentals of Electronics & SS Devices 
Understanding of basic semiconductors devices, characteristics, switching and basic amplifiers, operational amplifiers, frequency response, filters, wave generation, introduction to power electronics, team work. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 203. Co-requisite EECE 312. Course offered Fall Semester. 

EECE 310: Principles of Electronics 
This course is open to non-EE and non-CpE students only. The course covers theoretical and practical fundamental principles of electronic devices, circuits and instruments. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 159, PHYS 014. Course Offering: Fall and Spring Semesters 

EECE 312: Fund: Elec & SS Devices Lab 
Understanding of basic semiconductors devices, characteristics, switching and basic amplifiers, operational amplifiers, frequency response, filters, wave generation, introduction to power electronics, team work. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 209. Co-requisite EECE 309. Offered Fall Semester 

EECE 313: Electronics I Laboratory 
Hands-on experience in analyzing regulated half/full wave rectifier circuits, BJT, JFET, MOSFET and OP-AMP based single-stage amplifiers. One individual design project with oral presentations is required. Lab sessions involve simultaneous hardware measurement and PSPICE simulation. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
Same as EECE 307. Co-requisite: EECE 307. Course Offering: Fall Semester 

EECE 314: Electronics II Laboratory 
Hands-on experiences in analyzing multi-stage and power amplifiers, active filters, frequency response. Laboratory experiments cover real world electronic circuits. All the circuits used involve combinations of BJT, JFET, MOSFET and OP-AMP. One individual design project with oral presentations is required. Lab sessions involve simultaneous hardware measurement and PSPICE simulation. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Same as EECE 308. Co-requisite: EECE 308. Course Offering: Fall Semester 

EECE 318: Energy Conversion 
Review of polyphase circuits, electro-mechanical systems, magnetic circuits, transformers, D.C. and A.C. machines, transmission line theory, and introduction to power electronics, ac, dc drives, computer-aided design. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 301. Co-requisite: EECE 324. Course Offering: Fall Semester 

EECE 320: Research in Undergraduate Experience 
Research in Undergraduate Experience makes undergraduate students familiar with basics of research. Students practice research on a specific subject under supervision of a faculty member. Students perform literature review on their selected subject and discuss about it to the class. Through this effort, students become exposed to various subjects and understand the importance of and the need for research. The course teaches students how to present their work to others. It also emphasizes on long life learning. Further, students become familiar with LaTeX as a high-quality typesetting system used for the communication and publication of scientific documents. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Junior Standing. Offered Spring Semester. 

EECE 324: Energy Conversion Laboratory, 
Treats poly-phase power measurements, power transformer testing, connections, and operation and testing of dc motors and generators, and synchronous machines, transmission lines, and induction motors, basic electronic control of machines. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
Same as EECE 318. Co-requisite: EECE 318. Course Offering: Fall Semester 

EECE 325: Fundamentals of Energy Systems 
This course focuses on the fundamentals of energy systems centered around electric power generation. Starting with the traditional system of large, central power stations connected to their customers by hundreds or thousands of miles of transmission lines, this course covers distributed, renewable, cleaner, smaller generation systems located closer to their loads. In that regard, while other generation sources such as Biomass and Fuel Cells are covered, wind power generation systems and photovoltaic (PV) power generation systems are highlighted in the course. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 203, Co-requisite EECE 326. Offered Fall Semester. 

EECE 326: Fundamentals of Energy Systems Lab 
This course focuses on the laboratory experiments of fundamentals of energy systems dealing with poly-phase power measurements, synchronous machines, transmission line, renewable electricity systems of induction motor/generator. Also emphasized is renewable energy system modeling tools and system development using the modeling tools. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Co-requisite: EECE 325. Offered Fall Semester 

EECE 331: Probability & Statistics for Eng Appl 
Examines fundamentals of discrete and continuous probability: conditional probability, independence, random variables, density and distribution functions, expected value and variance, common discrete and continuous distributions, joint distributions, and introduction to simple stochastic processes. Applications to electrical and computer engineering; reliability of series and parallel circuits, models for waiting time phenomena. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 202. Course Offering: Fall Semester 

EECE 333: Fundamentals of Signals and Systems 
Design-based course introduces comprehensive treatment of basic signal theory in time and frequency domains. Discrete and continuous time cases are treated simultaneously, covers concepts of signals and systems, convolution of difference and differential systems, block diagrams, state-space realizations and solution, matrix theory, Fourier series, transform techniques (Fourier, FFT, Z and Laplace), frequency response and stability. Exercises include traditional homework problems, computer applications such as MATLAB, C and SIGSYS and hardware design (laboratory generation of various signals and application to systems response) and design projects (Demonstration is required). 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 331. Course Offering: Spring Semester 

EECE 350: Operating Systems for Engineers 
Fuses the history and evolution of operating systems, concepts of process management, memory addressing and allocation, files and protection, deadlocks and distributed systems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SYCS 136. Course Offering: Fall Semester 

EECE 401: Senior Design I 
Fundamentals of design principles, and engineering applications, design methodologies with emphasis on synthesis and evaluation, design process, reliability, the impact of engineering economy, report writing, ethics and alternative solutions will be discussed. During this course, students must identify a topic and an advisor for their Thesis Design Project. The project must be approved by the advisor and the course instructor. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Advanced Mathematics, EECE 307, EECE 211, EECE 332. Course Offering: Fall and Spring Semesters 

EECE 404: Senior Design II 
Enhances knowledge of engineering design principles to solve real world problems, project planning, analysis, simulation and presentation, economic impact, ethics synthesis. Design areas are selected from solid-state electronics, digital systems, communications (signal processing), power/energy systems and controls, power electronics, antennas and microwave and others. Oral presentation (with poster session) as well as written report required. Most of the semester will be devoted to the design and implementation of the Senior Thesis Project selected by student and approved by his/her advisor at the conclusion of EECE 401. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 401. Course Offering: Fall and Spring Semesters 

EECE 405: Energy Conversion II 
Deals with advanced steady state and transient analysis of electronic machines stability and control, and static converters and inverters. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ELEG 403. 

EECE 406: Advanced Digital Systems Design 
Presents design, analysis, optimization, and implementation of complex sequential digital systems and finite state machines (FSM). Hardware description languages (HDL), VHDL and/or Verilog, are introduced and will be used to design and implement digital systems. The structure of a computer and its organization will be reviewed. Finite state machine of a Simple CPU will be developed and various implementation alternatives (FSM, time state, jump counters, and microprogramming) of its controller will be studied. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 211. Co-requisite: EECE 412. Course Offering: Fall Semester 

EECE 408: Linear Control Systems, 
Deals with analysis of time and frequency response of closed loop systems, block diagrams, signal flow graphs, Mason gain, Routh-Hurwitz and Nyquist criteria for stability, root-locus method and system specifications, compensators, state variable methods, introduction to digital control. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 332.Co-requisite: EECE 414. Course Offering: Fall Semester 

EECE 410: Introduction to Computer Networks 
Presents basic concepts of data communication networking and computer communications architectures, including packet switching, local area networks, OSI (Open System Interconnection Architectures), TCP/IP, X.25/X.75, and SNA (System Network Architecture). 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 322. Course Offering: Spring Semester 

EECE 412: Advanced Digital Systems Design Laboratory 
Laboratory projects will use a PC-based Computer-Aided Design Tool environment that supports hardware description languages (HDL) such as VHDL and Verilog for design, simulation, and synthesis of logic systems. Early lab exercises (mini projects) will use SSI/MSI chips; then HDL-based design tools and associated methodologies will be introduced to design, simulate, and synthesize complex digital systems for implementation with Programmable Logic Devices and Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA). Teams of two or three students will select and undertake design projects. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Co-requisite: EECE 406. Course Offering: Spring Semester 

EECE 414: Linear Controls Lab 
Presents hands-on, design and computational analysis of analog and digital filters, control, drives, compensator design, P, PI and PID controller’s use of MATLAB tools. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Same as EECE 408. Co-requisite: EECE 408. Course Offering: Fall Semester 

EECE 416: Microcomputer Design 
Examines microprocessors, support architectures, and hardware/software. Also presents microprocessors' software model and programming, assembly language programming, microprocessor applications, microprocessor-based systems, and microcomputers. Projects will be used to introduce microprocessor applications. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 212. Course Offering: Fall Semester 

EECE 417: Computer Systems Architecture 
Core concepts of computer architecture are introduced. Instruction set architectures (both CISC and RISC), Microprogramming, pipelining, memory systems and hierarchy, and I/O architectures are studied. Core concepts of parallel computer architectures are introduced and examples of parallel computers are presented. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 211. Course Offering: Spring Semester 

EECE 418: Power Electronics 
Presents characteristics of power electronics devices, converters, AC-DC, DC-DC, AC-AC, DC-AC, power supplies, cycloconverters, design projects, computer simulations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 332, EECE 307. Course Offering: Spring Semester 

EECE 419: Motor Dynamics and Drives 
DC and AC drives, electric motors, microcomputer control, protective relaying, projects, computer simulations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 318, EECE 418. Course Offering: Fall Semester 

EECE 420: Introduction to VLSI Design 
Introduces CMOS technology and theory; CMOS circuit and digital logic design; layout rules and techniques; circuit characterization and performance estimation; CMOS subsystem design; VLSI systems design methods; VLSI CAD tools; laboratory experience in custom VLSI chip design on workstations using concepts in cell hierarchy; final project involving specification, design and evaluation of a VLSI chip or VLSI CAD program. Written report and oral presentation of the final project are required. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 211, EECE 308. Course Offering: Fall Semester 

EECE 421: Power Systems Analysis/Design 
Covers one-line diagram per unit quantity, power generation and synchronous machines, transmission line theory, analysis of interconnected systems using load flow studies and computation techniques. Economic operation of power system. Design projects. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 318. Course Offering: Fall Semester 

EECE 422: Power Communications &Control 
Continuation of EECE 421. Introduction to telecommunication, fundamentals of communications, data representation and communication, power system and fault analysis, protection and controls, power system stability, communication protocol concepts and security and standards. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE- 421. Course Offering: Spring Semester 

EECE 443: Introduction to Microwaves 
Introduces electromagnetic wave propagation, microwave transmission systems, tube and solid-state microwave devices, and waveguides, time-domain reflections, matching, Smith chart, S-parameters analysis, active and passive microwave components, and microwave measurement techniques. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 304. Course Offering: Spring Semester 

EECE 444: Antenna Theory and Practice 
Cover antenna parameters; polarization of electromagnetic waves; basic antenna types; antenna arrays; broadband antenna design; electrically small-wire-type apertures antenna design, measurements and simulation using Matlab or Mathcad. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 304. Course Offering: Spring Semester 

EECE 453: Communications Theory 
Includes probability theory, hypothesis testing, channel capacity, coding, detection and system performance analysis. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 331 or EECE 332.  Offered Fall Semester. 

EECE 454: Communication Electronics, 
Covers spectrum and noise measurements, analog and digital communication techniques. Covers design of AM and ASK detectors, FM and FSK modulators and phase lock loops. 
Credits: 
3 

EECE 456: Embedded Systems Design Lab 
Project based course for design and system integration of embedded systems using microprocessor boards and I/O devices. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 416. Offered Spring semester. 

EECE 459: Communications Theory Lab 
Covers design of modulation and demodulation circuits and filters. Co-requisite: EECE 453. Course Offering: Fall Semester 
Credits: 
1 

EECE 460: Wireless Communication 
Presents the physical layer of wireless communication systems, implementation of speech coding, error control, modulation/demodulation and filtering schemes for wireless links using digital signal processors for base band functions. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 453, EECE 459. Course Offering: Spring Semester 

EECE 461: Solid State Electronics I, 
Discusses semiconductor properties, valence bands, energy bands, equilibrium distribution of electrons and non-equilibrium transport of charges, Breakdown mechanisms; essential features of small AC characteristics, switching and transient behavior of p-n junctions. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 307. Course Offering: Spring Semester 

EECE 462: Solid State Electronics II 
Presents semiconductor electronic properties and applications to electronic devices; tunnel and Zener diodes, point contact transistors, FETs, MOSFETS, BJTS, multi-junction devices, and small, medium and large-scale integrated circuits. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 461. Course Offering: Fall Semester 

EECE 463: Digital Electronics 
Covers bipolar and MOS field-effect transistor characterization; characteristics and applications of TTL integrated circuits, design of memories, digital processors, special computer architecture, interfaces and A/D and D/A converters. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 307. Course Offering: Spring Semester 

EECE 465: Physical Electronics 
Analysis of semiconductor device characteristics, junction breakdown, base-width modulation and capacitive effects. Covers model derivations from physical considerations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PHYS 015, EECE 307. Course Offering: Spring Semester 

EECE 466: Advanced Electromagnetic Theory, 
Covers propagation of electromagnetic waves in general waveguides, losses in waveguides, fields and matter interaction, electromagnetic theory and special relativity, ionospheric propagation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ELEG 304. Course Offering: Spring Semester 

EECE 471: Design of Integrated Circuits, 
Covers microelectronics and circuit design. In-depth coverage of Silicon-integrated device characteristics and fabrication. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 308. Course Offering: Fall Semester 

EECE 477: Design of Integrated Circuits Lab 
In-depth theoretical and experimental microelectronics through hands-on circuit design and testing. Detailed coverage of silicon-integrated device characteristics and fabrication. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 471. Course Offering: Spring Semester 

EECE 479: Cybersecurity for NET CPS/IoT 
This course is designed to introduce emerging topics related to cybersecurity challenges and practical cyber-defense/countermeasures in networked Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) and Internet-of-Things (IoT). The course will cover fundamental concepts, technologies, theoretical understanding and practical basis for cybersecurity of networked CPS/IoT. Graduate students will complete an independent research project which involves a written and oral presentation not required at the undergraduate level. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Offered Fall Semester. 

EECE 487: Telecommunications 
Consists of telecommunications systems design for point-to-point and mass data distribution, modulation techniques, propagation modes and control methods. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 453. Course Offering: Spring Semester 

EECE 495: Signal Processing 
Presents sampling as a modulation process; aliasing; the sampling theorem; the Z-transform and discrete-time system analysis; direct and computer-aided design of recursive and non-recursive digital filters; the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) and Fast Fourier Transform (FFT); digital filtering using the FFT; analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog conversion; effects of quantization and finite-word-length arithmetic, and design and implementation of these algorithms on Motorola family of Digital Signal Processor chips and/or other similar DSP chips. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 333. Course Offering: Fall Semester 

EECE 496: Integrated Circuits Tech Lab 
This laboratory course is to serve as a hands-on introduction to the environment, processes, and procedures that can be used in the processing of semiconductor materials, and fabrication of nanostructures. Processes that will be performed include lithography, metallization, materials characterization, etc. The evaluation procedures associated with each process will also be examined. Students will process semiconductor wafers resulting in the formation of actual device structures 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Offered Spring semester. 

EECE 498: Independent Project 
Study performed by individual student under faculty supervision. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Departmental Approval. Course Offering: Fall and Spring Semesters 

EECE 499: Special Topics in Electrical Engineering 
Special courses not offered on a regular basis. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Departmental Approval. Course Offering: Fall and Spring Semesters. 

Architecture 
ARCH 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
ARCH 003: Environment and Architecture 
This lecture course examines the interrelationship between the natural and built environments.  Within this framework, students are introduced to natural, cultural, psychological, technological, economic and formal factors that have shaped buildings and human settlements across space and time.  The course explores the ecological impact of the human settlement; addresses current environmental issues, and acquaints students with concepts of sustainable architecture and development. The course is open to the university community. 
Credits: 
3 

ARCH 011: Elements of Architecture 
.Examines the elements of architecture as grouped into two major categories:  (1) elements which originate from the needs of man and which are resolved in design, and (2) those elements which originate in nature and which are resolved in construction and technology 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 001, ARCH 150 

ARCH 015: Language of Criticism of Art and Architecture 
.Introduces the student to the modes of criticism in art and architecture and focuses on the roles language and text play in our understanding of the entities and representations in art and architecture.  Also provides an understanding of the new relationships between text commentary, language-criticism and the evolving discursive methods which linguistics has released into modern criticism. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 302; ARCH 303 

ARCH 100: Arch. Freshman Seminar 
A seminar course which introduces first year students to a range of areas of interest, expertise, and career paths within the architecture profession. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
None 

ARCH 150: Design Communications I 
A studio course that introduces students to architectural representation.  Orthographic projections, descriptive geometry, contours, paraline drawings, shade and shadows and model making are presented and applied. 
Credits: 
3 

ARCH 151: Design Communication II 
This course develops the techniques introduced in Graphics I and introduces freehand/estimated perspective, presentation composition and basic rendering techniques. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 150 

ARCH 160: Foundations in Design I 
A seminar course which introduces first year students to a range of areas of interest, expertise, and career paths within the architecture profession. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
None 

ARCH 161: Foundations in Design II 
This course develops the techniques introduced in Graphics I and introduces freehand/estimated perspective, presentation composition and basic rendering techniques 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Arch 160 

ARCH 199: Design I 
This first course of the eight-semester design sequence develops principles of architecture in a studio setting. Projects explore notions of space definition, landscape intensification and transformation, space organization and elementary construction technologies 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 003, ARCH 011, and ARCH 151 OR ARCH 151 or ARCH 160 and ARCH 616 

ARCH 200: Design II 
Continuation of Design I. The level of complexity of the projects is increased. Issues of intention and image are introduced. Natural, suburban and urban sites are used to broaden student awareness of the environment. Ordering principles are related to function and to site conditions. 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 199 

ARCH 201: Design III 
Reinforces the concepts introduced in Design I and II and explores the impact of function, structure, construction, site conditions and climate on architectural form. 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 200 

ARCH 202: Design IV 
Continuation of Design III.  Explorations of the impact of programming function, structure construction site conditions and the environment on architectural form. 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 201 

ARCH 203: Design V 
Reinforces work of earlier design studios and explores issues of more complex building types and urban design 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 202; ARCH 303; ARCH 522; ARCH 502; ARCH 651 

ARCH 204: Design VI 
Continuation of Design V.  Exploration of issues of more complex building types and urban design and building design comprehensive needs 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 203; ARCH 503; ARCH 951; ARCH 304 

ARCH 205: Design VII 
Builds on work of previous design studios and emphasizes exploration and development of architectural expression through integration of various aspects of architectural design within cultural and site contexts 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 204; ARCH 392; ARCH 015 

ARCH 206: Design VIII (Thesis) 
The final design studios emphasize exploration and development of architectural expression through integration of various aspects of architectural design within cultural and site contexts 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 204; ARCH 701 

ARCH 219: Contemporary Issues in Architecture 
Seminar course which focuses on the work and writing of contemporary “cutting-edge” architects 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 301; ARCH 302; ARCH 303 

ARCH 223: The Black Architect: A Historical Perspective 
Seminar/independent research course that focuses on the history of Black architects and architecture in the United States to introduce students to an overview of the history, practice and influence of Black architects from the antebellum years through reconstruction, modern and present contemporary periods. PREREQUISITIES: ARCH-301; ARCH-302. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 301; ARCH 302 

ARCH 223: The Black Architect: A Historical Perspective 
Seminar/independent research course that focuses on the history of Black architects and architecture in the United States to introduce students to an overview of the history, practice and influence of Black architects from the antebellum years through reconstruction, modern and present contemporary periods. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 301; ARCH 302 

ARCH 232: Women in Architecture and Design 
Lecture course that focuses on the contribution of women to architecture and design. Focuses on African American architects in the United States and also introduces a broader context of practitioners around the world. PREREQUISITIES: Successful completion of first year. 
Credits: 
3 

ARCH 270: Digital Tools in Arch. 
Introduces architecture students to computer applications to architecture. Provides computer literacy for both business and graphic computer applications and systems management. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
None 

ARCH 301: Architectural History Survey I 
Principles of architectural history, the why and how of the study of history is presented in the context of early civilizations and their architecture.  The course covers the beginning of the Arabic work, antiquity, late antiquity and post. Late antiquity crusades of Africa, Europe, Central Asia, Asia and pre-Columbian America. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 003; ARCH 011 

ARCH 302: Architecture History Survey II 
This course provides clear definitions and limits of the elements of architecture as they relate to socio-cultural systems conferring significance and noteworthiness to respective historical styles, from post-renaissance period to the contemporary period. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 301 

ARCH 303: History and Theory III 
The beginning of contemporary Western civilization in the Renaissance brings about new concerns. Architectural expression is presented as seen in Europe and America through the end of the 19th Century to the beginning of the 20th century to the era post modernism, to contemporary. Autonomous developments in the architecture of Africa, Asia, China, Japan and the Americas are examined 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 302 

ARCH 305: Principles of Historic Preservation and Documentation 
The course will introduce students to the history, theory and practice, design and aesthetics, laws and economics of historic preservation and the process and methods of documentation used to record historic building structures. The process and methods of documentation, research, analysis and graphic presentation utilizing a seminar/ demonstration/ case study approach is supplemented by seminar/lectures from specialists in the field. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 301; ARCH 302 

ARCH 308: Historic Preservation: Documentation 
The course introduces students to the practice, design and aesthetics, of historic preservation and the process and methods of documentation used to record historic building structures. This course familiarizes students with the methods and means of research, analysis and documentation for the restoration and/or renovation of a historic structure. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 301; ARCH 302; ARCH 305 

ARCH 311: South Asia Architecture and Art 
This course is an introduction to the art and architecture of the South Asia sub-continent of India, Pakistan and Bangladesh.  The course spans the period of its early beginnings to present-day Modern Asia in a holistic cultural passage that is a window to the sociological, economic and religious- Hindu, Muslim, Buddhist- issues, explorations of the climatic and the environmental influences on its art and architecture. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 301; ARCH 302; ARCH 303 

ARCH 312: Kahn: Theory of Tectonics 
This course, through class lectures and presentations, emphasizes the tension between the Theory and Practice of Architecture as illustrated in the work of Louis Kahn.  Considerable time will be spent analyzing each building by Kahn in terms of structure, materials, geometry, context, budget, sustainability, construction, program, concept, natural light, precedents, and phenomenology to serve as a model for how students can research, understand, apply the exposure and knowledge gained in school to real-world buildings in the future. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 301; ARCH 302; ARCH 303 

ARCH 321: Centennial Study in Architecture at Howard University 
The course Centennial Studies will plumb the individual stories that contribute to the saga of architecture education at Howard University, a great American story and give it expanded edges and the character that evolves from detailed, personal accounts of experiences over the course of life of the degree programs in architecture. February 9, 2011 marked the centennial anniversary of the Howard University Board of Trustees approving degree studies in architecture.  Over the 100 years since that initiating action, this saga has broad themes of challenges and opportunities and all manner of success among the students, faculty and alumni. Within the broad themes, individual topics will be researched and documented in appropriate media.  The intent is to identify and record the personal stories of participants in the saga. Specific skills that students will be exposed to and learn include researching historic topics, developing interview techniques, writing and varied presentation techniques, including short video documentaries. 
Credits: 
3 

ARCH 350: Survey Contemporary Architecture &Theory 
The primary learning objective in this course is to become familiar with the principle, current architectural theoretical ideas, their historical and cultural origins, principle protagonists and representative applications. The intellectual content comes largely from discourses arising form and responding to the sc-called “Post Modern Crisis". 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 301; ARCH 302; ARCH 303 

ARCH 360: Modern Architecture: Black Architecture 
An introduction to the contributions of Black architects, the modernist period architecture of black architects in Washington, DC from a historic overview to research, analysis and documentation of the architecture produced by these prominent architects of this period. The work, specifically, The Houses of noted architects, Hilyard Robinson and Howard H. Mackey are addressed. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 301; ARCH 302; ARCH 303 

ARCH 401: Materials and Methods I 
.Introduces students to the technologies of light construction including wood framing, masonry, and concrete. Properties of these materials are analyzed and the problem associated with their assemblies are studied and graphically illustrated. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 011; ARCH 001; ARCH 151 

ARCH 402: Materials and Methods II 
Further explores the issues from Materials and Methods I, analogy and specific issues related to assemblies in building construction and design. Steel and concrete constructions are also examined. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 401 

ARCH 406: Economic Analysis 
Introduces students to the concepts of economics of development and the impact of cost on design. Focuses on relevant development issues including: development goals, site acquisition, locations, market demand, zoning and land use regulations, construction financing and investment potential. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
 ARCH 205; ARCH 951 

ARCH 501: Stuctures I (Statics) 
Study of force composition, effect, resolution, equilibrium and the strength, mechanical and elastic properties of materials 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 007 

ARCH 502: Structures II (Strength) 
Elementary analysis and design of structural framing members in wood, steel, and concrete. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 501 

ARCH 503: Structures III (Structural Innovations) 
Analysis, design, comparison and selection of framing systems in the context of varied building requirements. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 205 

ARCH 504: Structural Innovations. 
Innovations in digital media has facilitated the generation of complex, “potentially-architectural” ideas with relative ease.  To explore these latent ideas as architecture, the study of structures must increase its capacity to engage these expressions. Through the dialogue between idea and structure architectural form is articulated. The course intent is thus, to develop the students understanding of the evolution of historical structural systems, as well as, the progression of innovative structural systems and their impacts and their potential impacts on architectural design. The course also applies a philosophical position regarding the relationship between structural systems and architectural form and space, to ultimately apply progressive thinking to innovative structural systems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 502 

ARCH 506: NOMAS Design Competition I 
Focuses on developing design ideas for entry into the 2019 NOMAS design competition in Brooklyn, NY. This 2-credit course will be taught in conjunction with a 1-credit course taught the following fall semester. It will function as an inclusive studio environment where all students are expected to participate not only in the completion of individual design work but also in team-skills building (through collective critiquing, research and collaboration). 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
Third or fourth year standing; ARCH 203 or ARCH 204; ARCH 511 or ARCH 518 

ARCH 507: NOMAS Design Competition II 
Continuation of ARCH 506, NOMAS Design Competition I. Students will further develop the design from ARCH 506 for entry into the 2019 NOMAS competition. Presentation boards and models as well as all other competition requirements will be completed. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Third or fourth year standing; ARCH 203 or ARCH 204; ARCH 511 or ARCH 518 

ARCH 511: Introduction to Computer Applications in Architecture 
This course introduces architecture students to the computer and its application to architecture.  Provides computer literacy for both business and graphic computer applications and systems management. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
NONE 

ARCH 513: Advanced Computer Applications Lec/Lab 
Course familiarizes students with 3-D modeling and rendering and visual communication and presentation techniques.  Students use the system to study mass, proportion, color, and materials to assist them in expressing the intent of their design concepts. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 512 

ARCH 515: Imagineering Design for Entertainment 
The course in entertainment design involves the development of both architectural, engineering and storytelling skills to conceptualize, organize, write, and illustrate specifications to construct and create material, for digital and virtual experiences. Students gain experience in industry concepts and technology, to understand and develop special effects and exhibit development for the entertainment field, including, museums, historic sites, and amusement parks. The focus of this course is on the development of a product rather that how to use computer applications and will stress an industry methodology (workflow) for the development of entertainment concept design. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 513 

ARCH 518: Advance Design Technology & Application 
Explores the use of advanced software and plug-ins to enable students to freely explore design ideas without limitation, develop design ideas with a heightened level of complexity, and produce quality representation narratives. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 511 

ARCH 521: Introduction to Environmental Systems I 
Exploration of energy issues and conservation, climate, and heat loss and gain as factors in environmental design. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 007; PHYS 008; ARCH 200; ARCH 402 

ARCH 522: Introduction to Environmental Systems II 
Examination of principles and technologies of life safety stems, vertical transportation systems, electrical supply and distribution systems, lighting, and acoustics and their integration with architectural design. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 202; ARCH 522; ARCH 502; ARCH 651; ARCH 303 

ARCH 530: Intro to Sustainability 
This introductory course will examine the meaning, history, sources, context and strategic approaches towards sustainability as viewed through a design lens. To approach an understanding of sustainable design, however, one must first explore what it means to be sustainable and why it is of primary importance in today’s world, especially in architecture and design. Through a series of lectures, readings, field trips, student presentations, projects and film, this course will serve as a launching pad for responsible action and thoughtful design. This course will take a macro approach toward sustainability by casting a broad net on what the operating principles and strategies of sustainable design should espouse. This course is not intended to create a detailed analysis of specific projects or energy models for high performance buildings. It is meant to introduce students to a number of sustainable strategies and to inculcate the necessity for their inclusion in all design. No software is required for this course and it is open to all students, regardless of program or year. 
Credits: 
3 

ARCH 550: Infrastructure Design &Development 
The intention of this course is to introduce students to the rigors of infrastructure design and development and the merits of interfacing of both gray and green infrastructure design systems and the associated appropriate thinking and vocabulary.. To make them aware of the various players and stakeholders, the various layers of information to be processed and mapped, and to then guide them into the development of appropriate reports to convey intent and design recommendations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 522 

ARCH 560: Building Types Research 
The course is designed to provide the student the opportunity to identify and address significant issues/concepts in architecture leading to the development of a building topic investigation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 951 

ARCH 602: Landscape Architecture and Design (Developing Countries) 
Principles and technologies of site design with emphasis on tropical regions. 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 201; ARCH 202 

ARCH 650: Urban Housing Seminar 
This seminar focuses on practical aspects of the development of publicly financed, affordable housing and urban neighborhood development, with a particular emphasis on environmental sustainability. Washington, DC will form the backdrop for the discussion, which will regularly include local practitioners who are, recognized experts on specific topics. At the end of the semester, each student will have an understanding of the political, financial and social context within which architects and designers must work to realize high quality design. The course starts with the history of urban renewal, the overall structure of city government and then addresses issues specific to individual projects, such as financing, planning/zoning, and environmental concerns. The course ends with a discussion of various redevelopment projects currently being built throughout the District. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 201; ARCH 202 

ARCH 651: Principles of Urban Design 
This course exposes architecture students to the concepts, methodologies, techniques and attitudes of urban design.  To convey an understanding of urban design in the contexts of both the micro and macro scales of the built environment and to sensitize students to the place of architectural interventions in systems of urban design 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 201; ARCH 303; ARCH 001; ARCH 521 

ARCH 652: Urban Design Case Studies 
The main components of Urban Design are the square, the street and the buildings that make up the public face of towns and cities. The subject matter of the course details the meaning and role these elements play in urban design and the ways in which they are arranged and designed. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 651 

ARCH 656: Introduction to Community Planning 
Course enables students to gain an understanding of and appreciation for the planning, policies, and programs which shape our communities.  Using the case study method, students will be introduced to basic planning skills, research, analysis, critical thinking, strategies for conflicts resolution, program planning, design and development.  The course is open to the University community. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 201; ARCH 202301; ARCH 302; ARCH 303 

ARCH 657: Preserving US Sites of Memory Abroad 
This course will study the design philosophies, design processes and meaning of the American Battle Monuments Commission (ABMC ) properties in Europe, the USA, North Africa, Mexico and Asia.  Additionally, sites developed by other entities in the US will be considered (Pennsylvania State WWI memorial outside of Chateau Thierry, France). This course is a specialized extension of Principles of Urban Design focusing on sites of memory and their characteristics. Students will apply the techniques of urban design analysis learned in Site: Design &Principles to study selected sites and their meaning and contexts. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 201; ARCH 303; ARCH 001; ARCH 25101; ARCH 302; ARCH 303 

ARCH 658: Urban Design of Sacred Places 
This course will explore the process that human beings used to make spaces sacred. It will examine four major examples of sacred spaces from the history of architecture 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 205; ARCH 951 

ARCH 659: Independent Study: New Orleans Rebuilding 
This course is designed to give students the opportunity to examine the physical, social, and policy changes in and around the city of New Orleans after the landfall of Hurricane Katrina. 
Credits: 
3 

ARCH 660: Urban Housing Case Studies 
This seminar will introduce students to different urban housing development models within the City of New Orleans with a particular focus on historic preservation. Students will learn the methodology of neighborhood development and preservation while maximizing sustainability through case studies. The course will culminate in a field trip to New Orleans where students will tour case study sites and meet development professionals involved in the important preservation work taking place. The class will be taught by live and remote lecture via Skype 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 201; ARCH 202 

ARCH 662: Tropical Architecture &Urbanism 
Studies severe environmental constraints that tropical zones place on architectural design and planning development. Emphasis on indigenous design and planning practices and solutions in addition to technologically advanced contemporary approaches and achievements. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 202 

ARCH 663: Black City: the Other and the City 
This seminar course explores the theoretical projections of the conceptual and ideological  constructs of "blackness” related to space and urbanity to engage in research to expand upon the framework of the black city by exploring the relationship between development of and race in the DC Metropolitan area. The course intent is consistent with the Architecture programs direction of community design and understanding of the urban environment, especially of the African American communities 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 301; ARCH 302; ARCH 303 

ARCH 664: Design for Low Cost Housing: Global Perspective 
In this course, students will use the case study format through comprehensive student group projects to identify design principles, planning, problems, lack of imagination, lack of design, for planned expansion, neglect of fundamental principles of climatology as applied to housing design, identification of what inhibits the principles of good design as a result of customs taboos, and the desires of people in selected and diverse communities. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 301; ARCH 302; ARCH 303 

ARCH 669: Islamic Architecture &Urbanism 
The course is a critical survey of the history and theory of urban development, organization, and architecture of Muslim cities with specified periods of history as well as within given parts of the world. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 302 

ARCH 701: Public Issues and Architecture 
This course introduces students to key issues and factors linking architects to the public through an examination of historical developments, public policy, and contemporary development initiatives.   An emphasis is placed on issues related to the proliferation of suburbia and the resurgence of urban centers in North America. Human settlements and buildings are shaped within processes and systems regulated by government.  They are also a reflection of cultural and social values, channeled through the work of design and development professionals 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 203 

ARCH 751: Professional Practice 
Study of standard practices of the architectural profession, including ethics, contracts, performance criteria and fiscal management. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 205 

ARCH 752: Business of Architecture 
This course will provide students with a broad understanding of the real estate development industry, real estate finance and the architect's role in a development deal. Students will track an affordable housing deal from beginning to completion, while concurrently learning about issues surrounding site selection, land use and zoning, finance, ownership structure, construction documents, relationships of parties, and sustainability.  The course will include an analysis of project pro forma, the financial relationships of the parties, risk and liability, as well as financing tools.  By the end of the course students will have a firm grasp of the anatomy of a real estate project, and understand how to evaluate potential projects using the triple bottom line metric. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 203 

ARCH 753: The Anatomy of Black Architectural Practice 
This introductory survey course focuses on the historical and the current issues, theories and approaches related to the practice of architecture in firms headed by African Americans. The course engages both research and seminar formats to investigate and report on the factors which influence the success (or failure) of the African American in architecture practice. The research and course is consistent with the Department of Architecture's goal of advancing the study of the role of the African American Architect, of Howard University’s role as the leading educator of Black architects, and to enhancing the scholarship of the Black Architect and to provide focus on the Howard University architecture program as a leader in the study of the influence of the Black Architect and its practice globally. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 200 

ARCH 755: The (FAB) Collaborative: Freelon, Adjaye, Cook 
This course focuses on various aspects of museum planning and design based upon the new Smithsonian Museum of African American History and Culture (NMAAHC), on the National Mall in Washington DC. Through firsthand insight into the interworkings of this historic–groundbreaking  design collaborative, the principals of the FAB team - Phillip Freelon, FAIA, David Adjaye, OBE and Peter Cook, AlA- through a series of collective lectures and workshops explore museum planning and design from the early political background leading to the inception of the project and the formation of this dynamic team, the conceptual realization and design to the eventual physical realization of this monumental design from the perspective of these world renown design principles. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 205; ARCH 951 

ARCH 803: Independent Study 
Independent study in the area of the student’s professional interest. Students must complete an Independent Study Proposal and have it signed by their major advisors as well as the department chair. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
 Fourth or fifth-year standing and approval of the faculty and Department Chair. ARCH 204; ARCH 701. 

ARCH 807: Site: Design &Principles 
The course covers all aspects of site analysis and design from the graphic tools to the critical components that must be evaluated in the process of determining the proper planning and design of a site. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 151; ARCH 199 

ARCH 809: Explorations in Architecture 
This seminar course focuses on international practice and merging trends in architectural design. Approval of the Department Chair. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 204; ARCH 701 

ARCH 811: Directed Studies 
Students work closely with an instructor or the department chair on a designated project within the Department of Architecture, faculty research or other initiative. Required guided independent study at the advanced level. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Department Chair approval. ARCH 204; ARCH 701 

ARCH 823: New Architecture in Historic Districts 
The course will examine the nature of historic districts, including the criteria for and importance of physical context. Students will be exposed to basic field techniques and skills necessary to accurately interpret the fabric of historic buildings and their settings. The analysis will include the impacts and implications of new design within historic districts 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 202; ARCH 401; ARCH 522ARCH 651 

ARCH 824: Waterfronts: Des &Sustain 
To introduce students to a range of practical issues involved in the design and management of modern waterfront development, including financing and fiscal arrangements, monitoring of instrumental behavior and use in development of mixed-use urban waterfront communities. The course examines several case studies drawn from around the world. It will highlight sustainability and public interest issues in waterfront development, and deals with the practical planning and design issues which determine how, where and when architecture, urban planning, urban design and urban landscaping  confront the realities of water, sustainability, waterfront regeneration, and the new densities and diversification of activities on waterfronts. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 651 

ARCH 891: Thesis Preparation 
Research methods, analysis, and program development for thesis project. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 204; and within 36 credits of completion of the curriculum. 

ARCH 901: Programming 
Course focuses primarily on needs of students who are approaching design problems requiring a sequential structuring for analysis, synthesis and evaluation. The course covers micro to macro-environmental programming and design procedures. Considerable emphasis on development and use of appropriate communication skills with case studies. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Second Year Standing 

ARCH 909: Advanced Delineation 
Study and application of rendering techniques in various media. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 151 

ARCH 912: Meaning and Symbolism in Architecture 
The course focuses on architecture viewed as systems, signs, and symbols and its processes studied through patterns of information and communication. The pedagogical objective is to accentuate on the differences between hidden dimensional meanings of a simple engineered building and a meaningful work of architecture. Symbolic language in architecture is represented through formal expressions of meanings associated with parts and patterns used in morphology of architecture whether they are parts, patterns, or the whole of any given piece of architecture 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 151 

ARCH 951: Construction Documents I 
Involves the preparation of technical, professional, and legal documentation for building projects 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 202; ARCH 522; ARCH 502 

ARCH 952: Construction Document II 
(Narrative) Continuation of ARCH 951. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 951 

ARCH 961: Construction Management 
The study of project management techniques as they relate to the architect and the construction industry 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ARCH 204; ARCH 402; ARCH 521 

ARCH 998: Internship 
Students are placed on a part-time basis with practicing firms, municipal and governmental agencies to participate in the actual organizational functions. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Third year standing. Permission of the faculty. 

Chemical Engineering 
CHEG 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
 
CHEG 102: Introduction to Engineering Design 
Introduction to chemical process design within the context of technological, social, cultural and intellectual developments; The course will help students to appreciate and understand the intellectual framework of engineering and the critical thinking that goes into it; Students will be expected to incorporate an understanding of the role of economic, safety, environmental and ethical considerations into the practice of engineering; and understand the way data is obtained and analyzed with an introduction to software packages that will be utilized in the chemical engineering program; and to provide students the skills and background necessary to be able to interpret data and discuss and communicate results and conclusions. CO-REQ: CHEM-003. 
Credits: 
3 

CHEG 201: Chemical Engineering Material Balances 
Analysis and application of material balances to chemical engineering operations and processes, introduces stoichiometric relations, process flow sheeting and correlations of chemical and physical properties. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH-156 & CHEM-003 

CHEG 202: Chemical Engineering Energy Balances 
Application of energy balances to chemical engineering operations and processes that involve non-reactive and reactive systems. The first law of thermodynamics and the correlation of chemical and physical properties are treated along with chemical and phase equilibria. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEG-201 and MATH-157. 

CHEG 211: Computational Methods in Chemical Engineering 
Elective. Introduction to the methods and techniques of computer-assisted problem solving methods, and also to review various engineering mathematical techniques and their application in solving chemical engineering problems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEG 102, MATH 156 

CHEG 301: Fluid Mechanics 
Quantitative study of chemical engineering unit operations including fluid flow in piping systems and through porous media; motion of particles in fluids; metering; and differential analysis of pipe flow. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEG-202, PHYS-013 

CHEG 302: Heat Transfer 
Quantitative study of chemical engineering operations including heat exchange by conduction, convection and radiation as well as Heat Exchanger Design. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH-159; CO-REQ: CHEG-301. 

CHEG 303: Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics 
Course focuses on the basic thermodynamics theorems for single phase behavior (gas and liquid) of pure and the mixture system, phase equilibrium, and the modeling for physical processes and industry applications. PREREQ: CHEG-202; PHYS-013 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEG-202; PHYS-013. 

CHEG 306: Chemical Engineering Analysis 
Introduction of chemical engineering analysis that enables us to express engineering problems in precise quantitative terms. This translation process, from physical system to mathematical description, will be emphasized throughout the course. The fundamental principles that will be used are the conservation laws of mass and energy adapted to the particular situations of interest. These may be closed systems (no flow into or out of the system boundaries) or open systems where such flows occur. We will solve systems of algebraic and first order differential equations with an emphasis on the modeling and simulation techniques of the MATLAB/SIMULINK package. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH- l59, CHEG-30l; CO-REQ: SYCS-165 

CHEG 401: Separation Process/Mass Transfer 
Quantitative study of chemical engineering operations involving equilibrium stage and differential mass transfer operations. To instruct the students on the fundamentals and the methodologies of equilibrium stage and differential mass transfer operations for the calculation of separation parameters. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEG-302, CHEG-303, CHEM-171/Permission of instructor. 

CHEG 402: Process Control 
Involves methods of process control, dynamic response of chemical processing equipment and systems, modes of control and controller characteristics, and use of mathematical and experimental models. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEG-302, CHEG-306 or Permission of Instructor. 

CHEG 403: Chemical Reaction Engineering 
Presents the fundamentals of chemical reaction kinetics and application of kinetics, thermodynamics, and transport phenomena to the design of chemical reactors. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEG-301, CHEG-303, CHEM-141, CHEM-171, MATH-159 or Permission of instructor. 

CHEG 405: Chemical Engineering Laboratory 
Application of chemical engineering process and unit-operation principles to quantitative experiments in small-scale equipment. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM-145 or CHEM-173; COREQ: CHEG-401 

CHEG 406: Introduction to Polymer Systems 
Elective. Modern industrial and commercial processes for production and fabrication of polymer materials. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM-l42 and CHEM-l7l; CHEG 303; COREQ: CHEG 302. 

CHEG 407: Process Design I 
Involves cost estimation, materials of construction, and fabrication selection in the optimum design of chemical processing systems and equipment along with optimization incorporating the time-value of money and mathematical programming techniques. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEG-303, CHEM-171 or Permission of instructor; COREQ: CHEG-302, CHEG- 401. 

CHEG 408: Mathematical Methods in Chemical Engineering 
Elective. Teaches use of the basic laws of conservation of momentum, mass, and energy, including rate expressions to formulate ordinary, partial differential and other fundamental equations describing chemical engineering processes, analytical and numerical solutions of resulting equations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEG 306 or permission of instructor. 

CHEG 409: Independent Study in Chemical Engineering. 
Elective. Provides advanced treatment of selected topics in chemical engineering, with independent study subjects arranged to fit the interests of the student and advisor. 
Credits: 
1 
- 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior standing or Permission of instructor. 

CHEG 410: Advanced Mass Transfer -- Selected Topics 
Elective. Deals with dynamic sorption operations and newly developing separation techniques, including equilibrium concepts and mass transfer design methods. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEG 303 and CHEG 401 

CHEG 412: Transport Phenomena 
Elective. Provides a unified treatment of momentum, heat, and mass transport, with development of equations of change and application of microscopic and macroscopic balances to a variety of chemical engineering problems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEG 306; COREQ: CHEG-40l or Permission of instructor. 

CHEG 413: Chemical Engineering Lab 
Course involves the application of chemical engineering process and unit-operation principles to quantitative experiments in small-scale equipment. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 145 or CHEM 173; Coreq: CHEG 401, CHEG 403 

CHEG 414: Process Design II 
Instruction in the use of chemical engineering and economic principles in solving problems of design and optimization of chemical processing systems and equipment, along with application of optimization methods and computer simulations in determining optimum selection of process variables. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEG-306, CHEG-401, CHEG-403, CHEG-407, CHEM-142, CHEM-172 or Permission of instructor. 

CHEG 416: Fundamentals of Environmental Engineering 
Elective. Introduces students to environmental engineering, hydrology, water and waste water treatment, air pollution and control, solid waste disposal, and hazardous waste treatment and management. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEG 306 or Permission of instructor. 

CHEG 417: Frontiers in Nanoscience Engineering and Technology 
Elective. This course will emphasize the history of and characterization tools for nanotechnology. Leading edge areas of research and potential impacts of nanotechnology will be covered. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of instructor. 

CHEG 424: Bioprocess Engineering 
Elective. Provides students with a rudimentary but sufficient and necessary introduction to the biological sciences, which underlie the applications of chemical engineering principles and practices to the biological processing of materials into marketable products and processes. The principles and practices of chemical engineering are then brought to bear on phenomena in the various life-science disciplines leads then to studies of bioreactor engineering, kinetics and design, and bioseparation processes. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEG 202 or Permission of instructor. 

CHEG 425: Air Pollution Engineering 
Elective. Deals with thermodynamics and reaction kinetics of primary and secondary air pollutants, transport and diffusion processes in the atmosphere, stack design and plume dispersion modeling, and design of air pollution control equipment for particulates and gases. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 142 and CHEG 306; CO-REQ: CHEG 401. 

CHEG 426: Polymer Rheology 
Elective. Treats viscoelasticity and the generalized Newtonian fluid, including the power law, in fluid mechanics and rheology. Differential and integral constitutive equations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEG 412. 

CHEG 428: Introduction to Electrochemical Engineering 
Elective. Introduces students to fundamentals of electrochemical engineering. Treats fuels cells, energy generation with some focus on electrochemical membranes. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of instructor. 

CHEG 430: Nanomaterials 
Elective. Leading edge areas of research and potential impacts of nanotechnology will be covered. Although nanomaterials fabrication and processing will be emphasized, production of nanobioassemblies, and nanomedicine applications will be reviewed. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of instructor. 

CHEG 800: Chemical Engineering Seminar 
Elective. Presents selected topics of interest to chemical engineering students and professionals and discusses professionalism, careers in chemical engineering, graduate school and AIChE. 
Credits: 
0 

CHEG 900: Engineering Practice 
Elective. Involves practical engineering work carried out by students enrolled in the Cooperative Education Program during the time spent in industry. Credit may be awarded based on an evaluation of work experience by the faculty and employers. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Enrollment in Cooperative Education Program. 

EGPP 101: Introduction to Engineering 
Introduces and engages first year engineering students in the engineering and design process. Focus is given to knowledge of ethics and other issues of relevance to society. PREREQ: None. 
Credits: 
2 

Mechanical Engineering 
MEEG 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
 
 
MEEG 102: Introduction to Engineering II 
Continuation of EGPP 101. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
EGPP 101. 

MEEG 103: Introduction to Computer Aided Design 
Introduction to engineering drawing and descriptive geometry, space visualization and coordinate systems, conventions, projection drawings, freehand sketching, vectors, and graphical mathematics. Freehand, instrument, and computer techniques are used. 
Credits: 
2 

MEEG 202: Product Development I, 
Treats different stages in developing a product including identification of customer need, product specifications, design conceptualization, product architecture and design for manufacturing. Also discusses effective prototyping and economics of product development. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 102. 

MEEG 203: Product Development II, 
Manufacturing processes including metal casting, rolling, forging, sheet metal forming, material removal processes, polymer processing, and joining techniques will be discussed. Also, surface treatment techniques will be treated. Laboratory provides hands on experience in conventional machining, polymer processing, and composite manufacturing. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 103 

MEEG 204: Solid Mechanics, 
Presents basic concepts of stress and strain of deformable bodies, state of stress and strain, Mohr’s circle, and bending of prismatic bars, among other topics. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 202; Co-requisite: MATH 159. 

MEEG 206: Solid Mechanics Lab 
Experiments designed to expose students to experimental techniques applicable in evaluation of the mechanical properties of materials including measurement of static and dynamic properties 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 202, PHYS 013, PHYS 023 

MEEG 207: Introduction to Engineering Computations 
Introduces programming with computers. Programming concepts include procedural thinking, algorithm development, and techniques for developing solutions to engineering problems using software packages such as MATLAB 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PHYS 013 

MEEG 209: Material Science 
Correlation of the structure of metals, ceramics, and organic materials with their mechanical and physical properties; control of properties by modifying the microstructure, and stability of materials in service environments. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 003, PHYS 014, MATH 158 

MEEG 209: Material Science 
Correlation of the structure of metals, ceramics, and organic materials with their mechanical and physical properties; control of properties by modifying the microstructure, and stability of materials in service environments. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CHEM 003, PHYS 014. 

MEEG 301: System Dynamics 
Introduction to modern control theory, including digital control and nonlinear system analysis. Mathematical modeling of physical systems with mechanical, fluid, thermal and/or electrical elements. Classical feedback control theory and design, and their application to practical electromechanical and aerospace problems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 302, MATH 159, MEEG 207 

MEEG 304: Thermodynamics 
Presents basic thermodynamic concepts and definition, laws of thermodynamics, properties of pure substances, and entropy and availability. Introduction to statistical thermodynamics. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PHYS 014, MATH 158. 

MEEG 306: Applied Thermodynamics 
Study of mixtures, combustion, power cycles, gas turbines, and compressors; reciprocating engines, refrigeration, and reactive systems. Introduction to Onsager’s relations and direct energy conversion. Laboratory work included. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 205. 

MEEG 307: Fluid Mechanics I 
Includes properties and mechanics of fluids; kinematics; and control volume continuity, momentum, and moment of momentum equations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 159, CIEG 302. 

MEEG 308: Aerofluid Dynamics 
Potential flow theory and compressible flow; circulation, vorticity and wing theory, shock waves, expansion waves and nozzles; introduction to boundary layer theory and applications. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 205, MEEG 307. 

MEEG 310: Mechanical Design I 
 Integration of knowledge of strength of materials in a design context, stress and deflections in engineering structures. Theories of failure. Introduction to the design of machine components, such as screws, fasteners, bolts, welded joints, shafts, axles, and mechanical springs. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
 MEEG 204;  MEEG 209. 

MEEG 311: Mechanical Design II 
Discusses frictional and wear considerations in design of mechanical systems. Also covers design of rolling contact bearing, journal bearings, spur, helical, bevel, and worm gears, clutches and brakes, flexible mechanical elements; hydrodynamic lubrication. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 310. 

MEEG 313: System Dynamics and Controls 
Introduction to modern control theory, including digital control and nonlinear system analysis. Mathematical modeling of physical systems with mechanical, fluid, thermal and/or electrical elements. Classical feedback control theory and design, and their application to practical electromechanical and aerospace problems. 
Credits: 
4 
Prerequisites: 
CIEG 302, MEEG 205, MEEG 307, MATH 159. 

MEEG 315: Experimentation I 
Basic principles of instruments and sensors employed in engineering measurements. Nature of experimental error and uncertainty analysis. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
ELEG 204, ELEG 310, MATH 159. 

MEEG 316: Instrumentation & Experimentation Lab 
Basic principles of instruments and sensors employed in engineering measurements. Nature of experimental error and uncertainty analysis. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
EECE 310, MATH 159 

MEEG 318: Jet Propulsion 
Power cycles, combustion fundamentals, aircraft and missile propulsion, engines compressors and turbines. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 306; MEEG 320. 

MEEG 319: Manufacturing 
Discusses major groups of manufacturing processes which consist of casting, forming, machining and joining processes. Each group of manufacturing processes includes several manufacturing techniques for producing diverse manufactured parts. Also, manufacturing processes for a competitive environment will be introduced. These processes include automation in manufacturing and computer-integrated manufacturing. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 204, MEEG 209 

MEEG 320: Fluid Mechanics II 
Covers the fundamental physical concepts related to external flow. Students will demonstrate necessary problem-solving skills to solve basic engineering problems in fluid and aero systems in which fluid analysis is necessary. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 307 

MEEG 350: Computer Aided Engineering 
Theory and application of computer aided engineering based on FEA and CFD codes for the modeling, simulation and analysis of mechanical engineering systems 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 101, MEEG 204, MEEG 307 

MEEG 403: Heat Transfer 
Analytical and numerical treatment of heat transfer by conduction, convection, and radiation; steady and unsteady state heat flow; condensing vapors; and boiling liquids. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 205, MEEG 307. 

MEEG 415: Experimentation II 
Fundamentals of computer based data acquisition and application of digital techniques to mechanical measurements. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 315. 

MEEG 416: Aerostructures 
Static analysis of aerospace structures; external loading and environment; failure theories of materials; deflection of unsymmetrical cross-section beams; thermal stress; torsion of thin-walled sections; stiffened shell structures, buckling of columns and plates; introduction to dynamic analysis. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 158, MATH 159, MEEG 204. 

MEEG 417: Experimentation III 
Experiments designed to expose students to experimental techniques applicable in evaluation of the behavior mechanical and thermal systems. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 415. 

MEEG 418: Vibration Analysis 
Covers single DOF, two DOF and multi-DOF systems of vibration analysis, mode shape functions, numerical solutions and software packages. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 301. 

MEEG 421: Product Data Management 
Participants will study topics fundamental to global collaborative engineering, product data management, and collaborative product data management. These topics will be applied during team projects utilizing state of the art collaborative engineering and product data management software and hardware technologies. This course may also contain live online video lectures originating from participating universities. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 103; MEEG 310. 

MEEG 423 : Thermal/Fluid Science Lab 
Experiments designed to expose students to experimental techniques applicable in evaluation of the behavior fluid and thermal systems 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 307. Co-requisite: MEEG 403. 

MEEG 438: Environmental Control 
Analysis and design of heating, cooling, ventilation, and air distribution systems, including physiological and climatic factors, along with such new concepts of thermal systems as solar energy, total energy, and energy conservation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 306, MEEG 403 

MEEG 441: Senior Project I 
Independent team design study of current interest under supervision of faculty members. Report must be submitted for review by mechanical engineering faculty before graduation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 311. 

MEEG 442: Senior Project II 
Team design study. Continuation of MEEG 441. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 441. 

MEEG 443: CAD/CAM 
Fundamentals of computer graphics and introduction to computer aided design software and solid modeling. Fundamentals of machining, numerical control and numerical control programming. Laboratory provides hands on experience in computer integrated manufacturing and CNC milling and turning. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 207, MEEG 301, MEEG 310. 

MEEG 444: Robotics 
Kinematics and dynamics of robot manipulators, robot programming languages, structural members; fatigue, creep, and stress team or design study of current interest. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 313. 

MEEG 445: Undergraduate Research I 
Analysis, design and/or experimentation in Instructor’s area of interest. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of Instructor. 

MEEG 446: Undergraduate Research II 
Analysis, design and/or experimentation in Instructor’s area of interest. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of Instructor. 

MEEG 447: Computational Fluid Dynamics 
Solutions to fluid flow problems using computers. Students will gain familiarity with numerical methods and acquire experience in solving fluid mechanics and heat transfer problems using computers. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 320, MEEG 403. 

MEEG 450: MEMS 
Various topics related to Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) are covered in the class. Those topics are comprised of but not limited to micro-sensors, micro-actuators, optomechanical devices, and labs-on-a-chip 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
PHY 013; PHYS 014, MEEG 209 

MEEG 461: Energy Engineering I 
Introduction to modern energy sources useful for engineering applications. Includes fossil, nuclear, solar, wind, geothermal and biomass. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 306 

MEEG 462: Energy Engineering II 
Analysis of current practices governing use of energy sources. Effective utilization and economic considerations are discussed. New and emerging technologies (such as synfuels and cogeneration) are discussed. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MEEG 461. 

MEEG 990/991: Co-op Mechanical Engineering 
For students enrolled in the Cooperative Education Program during time spent in industry. Credit may be awarded based on evaluation of employer(s) and a written report by the student. 
Credits: 
1 
- 
12 

Computer Engineering 
SYCS 
EECE 423: VLSI Lab 
Lab that accompanies EECE 420 
Credits: 
1 

SYCS 100: Introduction to Systems and Computer Science 
Provides information about the curriculum and the various concentration tracks, faculty research interest, departmental resources, problem solving, critical thinking, computational thinking. Introduces the software engineering design process and provides the opportunity for students to complete a design project. 
Credits: 
2 

SYCS 135: Computer Science I 
This course provides an introduction to the discipline of computer programming, and is designed to expose students to basic programming concepts and to the use of the C++ language. This course is designed to enhance the student’s ability to design, develop and test/debug programs. Each student will increase his or her skill in writing correct and maintainable programs. Emphasis will be placed on problem analysis and on the subsequent development of algorithms. Several standard data types will be discussed and the student will gain an understanding of the issues relating to the use, design and implementation of each type in C++. A major focus of the lectures will be to provide an overview of real-world problem solving concepts and top-down software design. No Prereq. 
Credits: 
4 

SYCS 136: Computer Science II 
Course exposes students to the software development life cycle with a focus on the concepts and use of the object-oriented paradigm in problem analysis, solution design, software development and implementation. This course is designed to enhance the student’s ability to engineer software that is efficient, maintainable and cost efficient over its entire life cycle. Data abstraction is discussed in depth and students gain experience in the use of classes, object and member functions.  Students gain an understanding of the development of reusable abstract data types.  Software reuse is emphasized and object-oriented concepts are used throughout the course. O-notation and the complexity of algorithms are discussed at relevant points in the course. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Computer Science I (with a grade of ‘C’ or better). 

SYCS 140: Programming Team 
This course is for participants of the programming team. 
Credits: 
1 

SYCS 165: Scientific Computing for Engineers 
Introduces programming and use of digital computers through symbolic programming. Programming includes general problem-solving and the systematic development of algorithms; use includes the coding of programs and practical experience in Maxima or Matlab. 
Credits: 
3 

SYCS 165: Scientific Computing for Engineers 
Introduces programming and use of digital computers through symbolic programming. Programming includes general problem-solving and the systematic development of algorithms; use includes the coding of programs and practical experience in Maxima or Matlab. 
Credits: 
3 

SYCS 201: Computer Organization I 
This course introduces students to assembly programming. The concepts that support assembly programming will be taught, including data formats, addressing modes, computer arithmetic etc. The instruction set of a particular assembly language will then be covered in details. The relationship between assembly programs and high-level language programs will also be revealed. 
Credits: 
3 

SYCS 202: Computer Organization II 
This course reveals how computers operate logically at the hardware level and presents the relationship between computer hardware and software. Topics include performance metrics, logic design, non-pipelined and pipelined datapath design, memory hierarchies, and I/O devices. 
Credits: 
3 

SYCS 203: Object-Oriented Programming using Java 
This course provides an introduction to Java programming and object-oriented programming concepts for students with previous programming experience in C/C++. The course provides a comprehensive overview of basic programming concepts in the Java programming language using an object-oriented approach. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Computer Science II. 

SYCS 211: Unix Lab 
This course will present the basic concepts of LINUX and UNIX operating systems. Topics that will be examined include Vi editor, Linux Command, directories, Disks and File systems, Users and Groups, File Permissions, Processes, file compression, basic network use, manage files, create and modify files, and Shell script. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Computer Science I. 

SYCS 341: Theory of Computation 
Introduction to the classical theory of computer science. A study of the formal relationships between machines, languages and grammars; we will cover regular, context-free, context-sensitive, recursive and recursive enumerable languages. Sequential machines and their applications to devices, processes, and programming. Models of computation: finite state automata, push down automata, Turing machines. The role of non-determinism. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Computer Science III and Discrete Structures, Calculus II. 

SYCS 350: Structure of Programming Languages 
The course will teach students the basic components of the design and analysis of computer programming languages as well as the fundamental computation theory that is required to understand those concepts. The course will also cover several non-imperative languages (unlike C, such as LISP and Prolog) to expose students to the diversity of programming languages. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Computer Organization, Theory of Computation (After fall 2008). 

SYCS 354: Computer Science III 
The course continues the study of data structures and algorithms, focusing on algorithmic design and problem analysis and the relationships between data representation, algorithm design, and program efficiency. Topics include advanced data structures, key algorithm design techniques, analysis of the time and space requirements of algorithms, and the subsequent development of solution of systems. Concrete examples will be drawn from a variety of domains, such as algorithms for trees and graphs, indexing and search, and real-world problems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Computer Science II (with a grade of ‘C’ or better). 

SYCS 363: Large Scale Programming 
This course will introduce the students to applications and systems in the large scale. Students will be introduced to the object-oriented method to software design using UML and will apply the object-oriented design/analysis techniques of UML to a realistic Java application. Students will gain familiarity with managing larger projects and OOA/D. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Computer Science III 

SYCS 364: Web Services 
Presents  topics in distributed computing with particular emphasis on Web Services using Microsoft .NET Framework.  Also discussion on layered protocols, the client-server model, remote procedure call.  Students program extensively in C# and Visual Basic .NET. Corequisites: 306-401 (Undergraduate Operating Systems) basic knowledge of operating system services, 306-450 Data Communications. 
Credits: 
3 

SYCS 375: Software Engineering 
This course will introduce students to the basic concepts of software engineering and the software development life cycle. The course will cover methodological techniques for software specification, design, implementation, testing, verification, and documentation. The course will also present the use of state-of-the-art tools for computer-aided software engineering (CASE). 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Computer Science III (SYCS 354) 

SYCS 376: Operations Research (formerly Systems II) 
Methodology for planning, analyzing and evaluating optimal systems: identifying and structuring objectives and defining performance requirements that influence the design of the system. Synthesizing and analyzing alternative solutions and applying optimization techniques for the optimum queuing system. Applications to real world systems with open and closed queues with emphasis on computer systems using microcomputer software packages. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SYCS 375 Systems Engineering I (new name Software Engineering) 

SYCS 379: Introduction to Human Computer Interaction 
Students will learn the fundamental concepts of human-computer interaction and user-centered design thinking, through working in teams on an interaction design project, supported by lectures, readings, and discussions. They will learn to evaluate and design usable and appropriate software based on psychological, social, and technical analysis. They will become familiar with the variety of design and evaluation methods used in interaction design, and will get experience with these methods in their project. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Computer Science III 

SYCS 390: Ethical and Social Impact of Computing 
This course will present the foundations of ethics in the context of computing. The broader social impact of computing and technology in general will also be reviewed. Areas of specific focus will include technology and human values, costs and benefits of technology, the character of technological change, and the social context of work in computer science and information technology. 
Credits: 
3 

SYCS 401: Operating Systems 
This course will present the basic concepts of operating systems. Topics that will be examined include processes and interprocess communication/synchronization, virtual memory, program loading and linking system calls and system programs; interrupt handling, device and memory management, process scheduling, deadlock and the trade-offs in the design of large-scale multitasking operating systems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Software Engineering, and Computer Organization. 

SYCS 402: Mobile Application Development 
This course will introduce students to developing applications which target mobile devices. Students will be introduced to many issues unique to mobile applications, including synchronization, remote data access, security and sometimes-connected networks. They will research topics in these areas and develop a significant project which demonstrates their knowledge and understanding of these issues. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Computer Science III 

SYCS 410: Modeling and Simulation 
Introduces the fundamentals of system design and modeling. Emphasizes advantages and limitations of various modeling techniques for different applications. Introduces probability distributions typical of queuing models and presents in-depth discussions and experiments with existing simulation packages. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Systems Engineering I (Software Engineering new course name), Probability and Statistics 

SYCS 421: Computer and Video Game Development 
The course will span the software domains embedded in computer and video games. Topics such as game computational infrastructure, design, engines, and motion will be presented through discussion and assignments.  Game industry guest speakers will discuss software challenges and opportunities. Students completing this course will understand the software development process required to create a successful game and possess the programming expertise to create a simple game. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Computer Science III, Systems Engineering I (new name Software Engineering) 

SYCS 422: Game Engine Programming 
Game engine programming is introduced as a critical element in compelling game creation.  Programming activity will feature input capture, world integration, object motion, collision detection and audio scoring. Game performance metrics, code optimization and quality assurance testing procedures will be emphasized.  Code examples will be presented from XNA game studio and Torque. Course game project may be completed using a 2D or 3D game engine of choice including Torque, Gamestudio, Panda3D, or OGRE 3D rendering engine. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Computer and Video Game Development. 

SYCS 432: Database Systems 
This course will present the basic concepts of database systems. Topics that will be covered include basic relational database theory, relational database modeling, relational database design and implementation, normalization, transaction management, the SQL language and other languages and facilities provided by database management systems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Computer Science III. 

SYCS 440: Object-Oriented Programming 
Introduces the fundamentals of object-oriented information system development with a focus on analysis and design phases. Data modeling and design principles such as data abstraction, information hiding, modularity, and coupling are viewed in the context of object-oriented paradigm. For object-oriented modeling Unified Modeling Language (UML) is introduced and used extensively throughout the course. Issues relating to making the transition from other software development methodologies are examined and risks involved in object-oriented process are discussed. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Computer Science III 

SYCS 450: Data Communications and Network Programming 
This is an introductory course on computer networking. It will cover the layering model of the Internet. The upper four layers (application, transport, network and data link) will be discussed in details with dominant networking protocols and algorithms introduced. Students will also learn how to do basic programming on the Internet. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Computer Science III, Computer Organization, Analysis of Algorithms (new name Fundamentals of Algorithms), Discrete Structures 

SYCS 451: Applied Wireless Networking 
From both the conceptual and practical standpoints, this course will present the basics of wireless networking. Topics that will be examined include the connection between wireless networks and the Internet, radio signal transmission fundamentals, wireless LAN/WAN industrial stands, and wireless network administration such as network design, installation, configuration, maintenance and trouble shooting. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Data Communications 

SYCS 453: Intro to Cybersecurity I 
This course introduces the basic concepts of cryptography. Various cipher systems Various cipher systems are presented including transposition and substitution systems, Block ciphers, RSA &Knapsack. Methods used to attack ciphers are discussed with emphasis on complexity. Case studies of use of cryptographic methods in communication systems are presented with some consideration given to privacy issues. 
Credits: 
3 

SYCS 454: Intro to Cybersecurity II 
Modern topics in computer security, including: protection, access control, operating systems security, network security, database security, applied cryptography, cryptographic protocols, secure programming practices, safe languages, mobile code, malware, privacy and anonymity, and case studies from real-world systems. 
Credits: 
3 

SYCS 460: Advanced Systems Administration 
Advanced system administration course provides a strong practical experience to Linux and Solaris operating systems. The course includes topics such as Samba (Windows file and print sharing), Email, Web serving with Apache, remote access, networking setup, Internet proxy services, fire wall and security administration, deploy LDAP in a Linux, Solaris and windows environment and also compile, configure and patch  a Kernel module. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Data Communications, Unix Lab 

SYCS 470: Fundamentals of Algorithms 
Techniques for designing efficient algorithms, analyzing their complexity and applying these algorithms to a broad range of application settings. Methods for recognizing and dealing with hard problems are studied. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SYCS 354: Computer Science III, MATH 189: Probability and Statistics 

SYCS 472: Systems Management Analysis 
This course presents methodology for large-scale system design and analysis using modern semantic analysis techniques. Identification and definition of large-scale (community/industrial-based) problems. Discusses how to select and quantify measures of the severity of the problem. Presents different techniques for modeling alternative solutions to problems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Systems Engineering I (Software Engineering new course name). 

SYCS 474: Computational Biology 
Introduces computational methods for understanding biological systems at the molecular level. Problem areas such as mapping and sequencing, sequence analysis, structure prediction, phylogenic inference, regulatory analysis. Techniques such as dynamic programming, Markov models, expectation-maximization, local search. 
Credits: 
3 

SYCS 475: Intro to Machine Learning 
Techniques for learning from data and applying these algorithms to application settings. Topics covered include Bayesian methods, linear classifiers such as the perceptron, regression, and non-parametric methods such as k-nearest neighbors. 
Credits: 
3 

SYCS 478: Engineering Economic System Design 
Presents methodology for system design. Methodology begins with identification and definition of private sector problems to which solutions are justified by economics. Discusses selection of appropriate economic measures for comparing alternative solutions such as present worth, equivalent annual cost, cost/benefit ratio, life cycle cost, return on investment payback period. Presents different techniques for modeling alternative solutions to the problems and predicting cost. Other topics discussed include decision-making, system implementation, operations and retirement. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Systems Engineering II (new name Operations Research). 

SYCS 480: Digital Media and Multimedia Applications 
This course provides an introduction to digital media fundamentals including audio, video formats, storage and delivery. Windows Media and other technology will be extensively utilized as a method for digital content manipulation, rights management and internet transfer. Students will be exposed to basic internet architecture, operations and useful world wide web (WWW) resources. In addition, a practical understanding of digital computational devices, communication ports and connection cables will be acquired. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior Standing. 

SYCS 491: Senior Project I 
Allows the senior student the opportunity to demonstrate his or her knowledge of systems engineering and computer science principles by application to a class project of his or her choosing, with the guidance and supervision of a faculty member. The student develops a proposal for the project, followed by an architectural design and detailed design, all of which must be presented in class. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
Systems Engineering I (Software Engineering new course name), Computer Organization. 

SYCS 492: Senior Project II 
In part two, the senior student develops and implements the system solution to the proposed project. The system, most commonly comprising computer software, hardware, procedures, etc., is implemented and tested in the department's Systems Development Laboratory. The student is required to demonstrate the system solution to the faculty and the student body of the department. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
Senior Project I. 

SYCS 493: The Lean LaunchPad: Technology Entrepreneurship and Lean Startups 
This course provides real world, hands-on learning on what it’s like to actually start a high-tech company. This class is not about how to write a business plan. It’s not an exercise on how smart you are in a classroom, or how well you use the research library to size markets. And the end result is not a Power Point slide deck for a VC presentation. And it is most definitely not an incubator where you come to build the.hot-idea that you have in mind. This is a practical class–essentially a lab, not a theory or.book class. Our goal, within the constraints of a class room and a limited amount of time, is to create an entrepreneurial experience for you with all of the pressures and demands of the real world in an early stage startup. You will be getting your hands dirty talking to customers, partners, competitors, as you encounter the chaos and uncertainty of how a startup actually works. You’ll work in teams learning how to turn a great idea into a great company. You’ll learn how to use a business model to brainstorm each part of a company and customer development to get out of the classroom to see whether any one other than you would want/use your product. Finally, based on the customer and market feedback you gathered, you would use agile development to rapidly iterate your product to build something customers would actually use and buy. Each day will be new adventure outside the classroom as you test each part of your business model and then share the hard earned knowledge with the rest of the class. 
Credits: 
3 

SYCS 498: Special Topics: Robotics Programming 
This course will present the basic concepts of programming intelligent robot systems. Topics that will be examined include a general introduction to robotics hardware, a survey of actuators and how to use them and programming sensors. Higher level concepts that will be covered include multi-robot communication, robot localization and path planning. Most topics covered in the course will have an associated project implemented with the Lego Mindstorms NXT kit. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Computer Science or Scientific Computing for Engineers or (some prior programming experience), Calculus I. 

Hospitality Management 
HOSP 
HOSP 300: Introduction to the Hospitality Industry 
A survey of the history, direction, and organizational structure of the hospitality industry and the place of the hotel, motel, and restaurant in the local and national economy. 
Credits: 
3 

HOSP 301: Hotel/Motel/Restaurant Management 
Application of management tools, techniques and concepts to hotels, motels, restaurants, resorts, clubs and their various departments 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MGMT 301 and FINA 311. 

HOSP 303: Food Service Management 
Involves the basics of commercial food preparation, product identification, menu planning, sanitation, scheduling, staffing, and merchandising 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ACCT 201, MGMT 301, and HOSP 301. 

HOSP 305: Hospitality Financial Management 
Emphasizes the financial practices and systems used in hotels, motels, and restaurants. Involves the interpretation of financial statements, cash forecasting, taxes, and cash flow analysis 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
HOSP 301. 

HOSP 307: Lodging/Property Management 
Deals with the management of hospitality property in terms of its physical aspects, capital investment, layout and designs, building renovation, maintenance of facilities and equipment, and building systems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
HOSP 301. 

HOSP 309: Hotel and Restaurant Law 
Examines the legal dimensions of hotels, motels, restaurants, resorts, and associated businesses, including the duties, rights and liabilities of the innkeeper-host and guests 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
HOSP 300 and BLAW 305. 

HOSP 311: Hospitality Marketing 
Deals with the development, use and evaluation of effective merchandising, advertising and public relations techniques in the hospitality industry. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
HOSP 300 and MKTG 311. 

HOSP 312: Club/Institutional Management 
Treats the overall operation of private clubs, including food service, private group arrangements, recreational facilities, staffing, etc. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
HOSP 301. 

HOSP 313: Management of Tourism 
Deals with the travel industry and operations of enterprises in the industry. Highlights trends, travel modes, economic impact on destination areas, tourism development, and marketing. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
HOSP 301. 

HOSP 315: Food, Beverage, and Labor Cost Controls 
Examines forecasting, selecting purveyors, ordering, receiving, storing, merchandising, controlling inventory, and issuing. Labor, preparation, pre-control methods, comparison of actual and standard costs, scope of the menu, and customers’ expectations are also discussed. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
HOSP 300 

HOSP 317: Convention/Meeting Planning 
Organizing and operating conventions, trade shows, concessions, and recreational facilities. Emphasis on sales methods, booking, and the administrative aspects of operations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
HOSP 300. 

Finance 
FINA 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
FINA 100: Cooperative Program I 
  Offers career-related training consistent with student’s interest. 
Credits: 
1 

FINA 200: Cooperative Program II 
Continuation of FINA 100, with additional responsibilities to enhance career development. 
Credits: 
1 

FINA 210: Personal Money Management 
This course is designed to give students exposure to personal financial-making decisions. The course is open only to non-business majors. The objectives are to give students information in the following areas: credit issues, banking, taxes, record keeping, real estate, insurance, savings and investments, estate planning, retirement, and employee benefits. Non- Business majors only. 
Credits: 
3 

FINA 300: Cooperative Program III 
A comprehensive phase of assignments consistent with student’s career objective. 
Credits: 
2 

FINA 311: Finance Principles 
An introduction to the general principles of business finance 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ACCT 202, ECON 001 and ECON 002. Course designed for non-finance majors. 

FINA 312: Business Finance 
The Finance function in business with emphasis on valuation and working capital management 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 001, ECON 002 and ACCT 202. 

FINA 313: Financial Management 
An analysis of the major parameters in the financial decision-making process with an emphasis on long-term financing. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FINA 311 or FINA 312. 

FINA 320: Principles of Personal Financial Planning 
A comprehensive analysis of the personal financial planning process as it relates to planning the total financial and estate affairs of individuals and families. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FINA 311 or FINA 312. 

FINA 322: Financial Markets and Institutions 
An analysis of financial markets and their impact on the creation, operation, and public regulation of financial institutions. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FINA 311 or FINA 312. 

FINA 323: Commercial Banking 
The study of commercial banking as a profit-seeking enterprise. The course also focuses on loan policy, credit documentation, investigation, analysis, and decision making. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FINA 311. 

FINA 330: Principles of Investments 
The study of conceptual foundations and the practical pursuit of investment objectives. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FINA 311 or FINA 312. 

FINA 331: Investment Analysis and Portfolio Management 
The development and application of Modern Portfolio theory. A comparison of investment alternatives 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FINA 330. 

FINA 357: Independent Study in Finance I. 
A specialized finance project or preparation for professional finance examinations. 
Credits: 
1 
- 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FINA 313. 

FINA 358: Independent Study in Finance II. 
A specialized research into finance problems or preparation for professional finance examinations. 
Credits: 
1 
- 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FINA 357. 

FINA 360: Seminar in Finance 
Readings, research, and the discussion of advanced finance topics 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FINA 313 and permission of the instructor. 

FINA 361: Bank Credit Administration 
 Covers loan policy, credit documentation, investigation, and analysis. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FINA 311 or FINA 312. 

FINA 363: Computer Application of Financial Analysis 
An introductory course in computer application to business and financial decision-making 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FINA 311 or FINA 312. 

FINA 364: Investment Banking 
 An analysis of the issues and operations of investment banking. Topics include fixed income securities, mergers and acquisitions, IPO’s, seasoned issues, venture capital, ethics, trading, financial engineering, etc 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FINA 313. 

FINA 365: Financial Derivatives. 
An in-depth analysis of options, futures, and other derivatives 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FINA 313 and FINA 330. 

FINA 370: Bond Markets: Analysis and Strategies 
 An in-depth analysis of fixed-income securities. Topics include: measuring yields, bond price volatility (duration and convexity); the term structure of interest rates; non-U.S. bonds; treasury and agency securities markets; corporate and municipal debt instruments; convertible bonds; collateralized mortgage obligations; mortgage-backed securities; other asset-back securities; interest rates; futures, options, swaps and agreements. Also includes bond portfolio management strategies. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FINA 313. 

FINA 371: Venture Capital 
A review of the overall process of venture capital from both the venture capitalist’s perspective and the entrepreneur’s perspective. The role of venture capital in both the U.S. economy and developing economies is discussed. A complete overview of the venture capital process is provided, including the proposal, the commitment letter, the closing, and the exit. Focus will be on the organization and management of a venture capital firm. The instructional method used in this course will be both lecture and case analysis. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FINA 311. 

FINA 380: Business Finance Policy and Decision Making 
The case method is used to identify, analyze, and make decisions concerning business problems that have financial implications. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FINA 313. 

Insurance 
INSU 
INSU 320: Introductory Actuarial Mathematics 
An introduction to the basic mathematical concepts used in evaluating life insurance and pension benefits, including compound interest theory, mortality tables, and multiple decrement tables. 
Credits: 
3 

INSU 350: Risk and Insurance 
Analyzes the nature of risk as it relates to personal, financial, and business decisions. 
Credits: 
3 

INSU 351: Life and Health Insurance 
Examines the economic principles, mathematical foundation, and legal framework underlying life insurance. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INSU 350. 

INSU 352: Property Liability Insurance 
An analysis of the needs by business and individuals for property liability insurance, the nature of coverage available, and systems of rating, marketing, and underwriting. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INSU 350. 

INSU 353: Social Insurance 
An examination of various federal and state programs of social and employment security, workmen’s compensation, and other government insurance. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior standing. 

INSU 354: Risk Management 
Identifies and evaluates loss exposures and develops risk control methods and financing techniques for exposures. The primary focus is on developing effective risk management alternatives. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INSU 352. 

INSU 355: Independent Study: Employee Benefit Plans 
Comprehensive study of the principles underlying the design and operation of employee benefit plans. The various administrative funding techniques for providing these benefits are evaluated. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INSU 351. 

INSU 357: Practicum in Insurance I 
Preparation for professional insurance examinations or a specialized insurance project. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INSU 350. 

INSU 358: Practicum in Insurance II 
Preparation for professional insurance examinations and research into specialized insurance problems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INSU 357. 

International Business 
INBU 
INBU 300: Principles of International Business 
An introduction and overview of the various issues involved in doing business in more than one country, including the social, cultural, legal, and economic aspects. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 001, ECON 002, and junior standing. 

INBU 320: International Marketing 
Discusses issues involved in identifying and exploiting marketing opportunities abroad. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301. 

INBU 340: International Financial Management 
Analyzes the various issues involved in the acquisition and investment of funds in the international markets. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
FINA 311 or FINA 312. 

INBU 357: Independent Study in International Business. 
Involves a plan of directed readings, discussions, and research on specialized problems. 
Credits: 
1 
- 
3 
Prerequisites: 
permission of the instructor. 

INBU 358: Independent Study in International Business. 
Involves a plan of directed readings, discussions, and research on specialized problems. 
Credits: 
1 
- 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INBU 357. 

INBU 360: Management of International Business 
Primarily uses the case method to identify, analyze, and solve a variety of strategic issues faced by the international manager 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MGMT 301, INBU 300, INBU 320, INBU 340, and senior standing. 

INBU 361: Export-Import Management 
Includes international market research, shipments, arbitration, and financing. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INBU 320. 

INBU 365: International Manpower Management 
Examines the quality, quantity, and cultural attributes of manpower available in various parts of the world. 
Credits: 
3 

INBU 390: Seminar in International Business 
Involves an international (or multinational) company study 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Senior standing or permission of instructor. 

Information Systems & Supply Chain Management 
 
 
 
INFO 396: Project Management 
Credits: 
3 

SCHM 360: Negotiation Fundamentals 
Negotiations are important in the context of acquiring goods and services and is used in many other aspects of professional and personal life. The ability to negotiate successfully is essential for business success, such as in negotiating with suppliers, customers and employees over a wide range of issues. This course focuses on improving the negotiation skills of each student. 
Credits: 
3 

Computer Based Information Systems 
INFO 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
INFO 101: Cooperative Program I 
Offers career-related training consistent with student’s interest. 
Credits: 
2 

INFO 102: Cooperative Program II 
Continuation of INFO 101 with additional responsibilities to enhance career development. 
Credits: 
2 

INFO 202: Computer Introduction 
 The course is an introduction to the elementary and fundamental concepts of modern information systems. The course provides hands-on experience with the application of software packages commonly used by knowledge workers. Students will develop small applications using Internet tools, databases, spreadsheets, word processing and presentation graphics, and also integrate these applications. 
Credits: 
1 

INFO 204: Management Information Systems 
The course provides a broad foundation in the concept of modern information systems, including information processing and information technologies in the corporate and organizational environments. Topics include strategic information systems, computer hardware and software, user-interface, data communications, and data management. The emphasis is on problem solving through the use of information systems tools to develop solutions for real-life cases of limited complexity. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
or co-requisite: INFO 202. 

INFO 210: Introduction to Software Design 
The course provides an introduction to software engineering, algorithm development and structured problem solving, coding, testing, and debugging techniques. The major emphasis is on programming logic. Small illustrative applications are developed using a high level programming language. (Formerly INFO 320) 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INFO 204. 

INFO 300: Structured COBOL Programming I 
The course involves the use of structured COBOL programming to solve a set of common business problems including data validation, multilevel control break processing, sequential update, the internal sort, and tables. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INFO 204, INFO 210. 

INFO 302: Introduction to C Language Programming 
The concept of Structured programming is emphasized. Functions and program structure: primitive data types, pointers, arrays, structures and unions: control flow, input, output, system calls and function arguments: types, operators and expressions are addressed. The C++ Programming Language is introduced. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INFO 204, INFO 210. 

INFO 304: Visual Basic 
The course provides an introduction to Object Oriented Programming. The student will be exposed to a style of programming especially suited for graphical user interfaces. Students will learn Visual Basic concepts like projects forms, controls/objects, properties and events combined with coding concepts like subprograms, functions, arrays, logic structures and different Input-Output processes to create Object-Oriented, Event-Driven programs. This course will provide a higher level of programming and problem-solving skills with particular emphasis on some of the more advanced topics in Object-Oriented programming. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INFO 204 and INFO 210. 

INFO 305: Structured COBOL Programming II 
Cobol Programming II is designed to develop advanced programming skills and techniques. Students will write High-Level COBOL programs that involve single and advanced level arrays and tables and multiple level control break processing. Students will develop and work with file maintenance programs that include file sorting and merging and sequential, indexed, and relative file processing. Advanced topics in COBOL II include the COPY and CALL statements, advanced debugging aides, the improvement of program performance, and the Report Write Module. The application of VSAM (ESDS, KSDS, RRDS) file processing, the IBM/MVS/ESA/TSO/ISPF environment for editing and managing data sets, and IBM JCL and IBM CICS/MRO are discussed and applied for batch and interactive processing. Students will apply these advanced concepts and techniques to design and develop challenging, real-world applications including subprograms, array and file sorting, advanced array structures, VSAM (ESDS, KSDS, RRDS) file processing, and the IBM/MVS/ESA/TSO/ISPF environment for editing and managing data sets. IBM job control language is used for compiling, linking, and executing batch applications and IBM-CICS/MRO is introduced for interactive applications. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INFO 300. 

INFO 307: Visual C++ 
This is a natural extension of the structured programming introduced in INFO 210. It moves into C++ quickly and to Visual C++. A thorough foundation of the C++ language is presented. Programs are written in both DOS and Windows platforms. The course uses the Microsoft Integrated Developer’s Environment as the development studio. Object-oriented Programming is emphasized as the paradigm for resolving issues of program complexity, software reusability, and program portability. Team study and solution design are the foci of instruction 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INFO 210. 

INFO 310: Data Analysis 
This course assumes fundamental knowledge of basic statistics through hypothesis testing with simple linear regression analysis or analysis of variance. The topics in this course include multiple regression analysis, analysis of variance, design of experiments, and time series. This course is aimed at the knowledgeable business student seeking a deeper understanding of statistical epistemology and decision- making. Experimentation with data bases using statistical software packages such as MINITAB, SAS, or SPSS is the implementation strategy of the course 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INFO 204, INFO 210, and Economics ECON 180. 

INFO 311: Quantitative Business Analysis 
In this course students develop the ability to model and analyze a variety of business related decision situations. This course emphasizes the use of spreadsheets in the modeling process. Classical Management Science and operations research techniques are used to develop insight into the optimization of decision-making 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MATH 010, MATH 026, ECON 180, INFO 204. 

INFO 315: Advanced Personal Computer and Workstation Concepts 
This course provides in-depth exposure to the hardware and software components of personal computers and workstations, computer configurations, LAN design, and documentation and implementation. The course also includes laboratory exercises that focus on DOS features, similarities between DOS and Unix, and TCP/IP protocols. Suggested Coreq.: INFO 360 or permission of the instructor. 
Credits: 
3 

INFO 325: Introduction to Data and Network Communications 
This course provides a comprehensive study of the communication hardware and software and the regulations required to deliver information from a source through a medium to a destination. Digital, analog, security, network, and network management requirements for data communication are introduced and implemented using software simulations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INFO 360 or consent of instructor. 

INFO 330: Data Base Management 
This course is an overview of the database approach and database management systems (DBMS). Topics include physical, conceptual, and external views of data; logical and physical data structures; referential integrity, data definition; and data manipulation languages. The course also covers the enterprise data model, the hierarchical data model, security and concurrency control, and client server computing. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INFO 360. 

INFO 335: Production and Operations Management 
The course involves the study of production and service operations from a systems perspective. The course emphasizes problem formulation, analysis of models necessary for system design and system operation, and the interaction between production and operation management activities and other activities of an organization. Global strategic and competitive issues are discussed. The course uses decision support systems software as appropriate 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INFO 311, MGMT 301. 

INFO 360: Information Structures 
The course examines various data structures, data types, and the search techniques required to develop or enhance a traditional or webcentric computer based information system. Using structured languages, a repertoire of algorithms and procedures are developed to solve business applications that encompass man/machine interfaces, efficient information storage, retrieval and sorting, and system simulation. Topics include stacks, parsing, single and double link lists, static and dynamic queues, and webcentric information structures. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
any course in a Programming Language. 

INFO 361: Operating Systems 
The course examines the components and features of operating systems, such as the nucleus, memory and second storage management, file management, I/O devices, and user interfaces. UNIX system calls, shells, software development utilities, and the X Window System are emphasized. Operating systems concepts are simulated using the C Programming Language. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INFO 360. 

INFO 365: Simulation and Information Systems 
The course features the identification of factors that influence business behaviors with the ultimate objective of building models to describe the behavior of a situation over a period of time using a computer simulation language. Probability distributions and problems relating to management are revisited to make the course more realistic and practical 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INFO 360 and MGMT 330. 

INFO 370: Systems Analysis and Design 
The course involves a systemic approach to analysis and the design of contemporary business information systems. Topics include systems development, life cycle phases and activities, systems analysis techniques, systems design techniques, and detail program design and implementation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
any course in a Programming Language. 

INFO 375: Seminar in Computer-Based Management Information Systems 
In this course, the student investigates and reports on special topics in information systems development. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior or senior standing. 

INFO 380: Decision Support and Expert Systems 
The course is an introduction to Decision Support Systems and Expert Systems with a brief overview of other Artificial Intelligence Technologies. Integrates theoretical concepts with a review of practical application cases and the current literature in the field. Student teams build Expert Systems prototypes and produce written project reports. Class presentations of projects are required. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INFO 311 or junior standing and permission of the instructor. 

INFO 390: Systems Development 
This course focuses on the development of an application system. Student teams will develop projects that involve all phases of the systems development life cycle. Issues such as project management, systems development methodologies, and systems testing are addressed. Each student is required to produce a research report that focuses on new technologies and methodologies that relate to information systems development. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
INFO 370 or senior standing and permission of the instructor. 

INFO 398: Information Systems Consulting 
This course investigates the tools used by and skills necessary for information systems consultants. The course will use team-oriented project approach, followed by several executives lecture to share their experience in information systems and consulting. Actual problems/ assignments from companies would be assigned to students and they would with them to complete projects that cover various phases of the consulting life cycle. They will evaluate the business needs and developing information systems and technology solutions 
Credits: 
3 

Accounting 
ACCT 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
ACCT 100: Cooperative Program I 
Offers career-related training consistent with the student’s interest. 
Credits: 
1 

ACCT 200: Cooperative Program II 
Continuation of ACCT 100, with additional responsibilities to enhance career development. 
Credits: 
1 

ACCT 201: Accounting Principles I 
Basic concepts of financial accounting theory, recording procedures, and financial statement preparation. 
Credits: 
3 

ACCT 202: Accounting Principles II 
Continuation of ACCT 201, including interpretation of financial data, cost accounting systems, and aids to managerial decisions. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ACCT 201. 

ACCT 300: Cooperative Program III 
 Continuation of ACCT 200, with additional responsibilities to enhance career development. 
Credits: 
1 

ACCT 310: Intermediate Accounting I 
Overview of the foundations of accounting theory, contemporary practices in accounting, and the application of professional standards to financial reporting 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ACCT 201, ACCT 202, junior standing, and a minimum cumulative grade point average of 2.5. 

ACCT 311: Intermediate Accounting II 
Continuation of ACCT 310. Includes techniques used in the analysis of earnings, cash flow, and changes in financial position. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ACCT 310 and junior standing. 

ACCT 318: Tax Principles and Procedures 
Covers the basic concepts of federal income tax determination and current reporting requirements 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ACCT 201, ACCT 202, and junior standing. 

ACCT 320: Cost Accounting I 
Includes job order, process, standard, and variable costing and the analysis of cost behavior 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ACCT 201, ACCT 202, and junior standing. 

ACCT 322: Cost Accounting II 
Approaches to management decisions using sophisticated cost-based analytical techniques 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ACCT 320. 

ACCT 330: Advanced Accounting 
Covers branch operations, business combinations, consolidated statements, foreign operations, partnerships, governmental accounting, and current trends in financial reporting 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ACCT 310 and ACCT 311 or their equivalents. 

ACCT 340: Auditing I 
Deals with the application of GAAP and auditing standards to financial and operational auditing procedures. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ACCT 311 or its equivalent. 

ACCT 341: Auditing II 
Continuation of ACCT 340. 
Credits: 
3 

ACCT 342: Global Accounting, Control, and Audit 
Operational auditing and information integrity in the context of International Standards. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ACCT 340. 

ACCT 343: Ethics, Values and Governance 
Explores the moral and ethical obligations of leadership and encourages students to think critically about the ethical situations that they are likely to encounter in their professional and personal lives. (Formerly BLAW 343). 
Credits: 
3 

ACCT 350: Accounting Information Systems 
Examines the development and use of management information systems based on accounting data bases 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ACCT 202 and INFO 204. 

ACCT 360: Fund Accounting 
Involves basic fund accounting and reporting for governmental units, agencies, universities, hospitals, and nonprofit entities 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ACCT 201, ACCT 202, and junior standing. 

ACCT 362: International Accounting 
Conceptual and practical applications of accounting are investigated from a global perspective. 
Credits: 
3 

ACCT 370: Controllership 
Study of contemporary practices in planning, organizing, and supervising the accounting and financial reporting function 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ACCT 310 and ACCT 311. 

ACCT 375: International Accounting 
A discussion of the financial factors faced by corporations with international operations such as complex accounting methods for foreign operations, accounting for foreign currency and inflation, international analysis of financial statements and international harmonization. 
Credits: 
3 

ACCT 380: CPA Examination Preparation I 
Intensive study of accounting practice and theory sections of prior CPA examinations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Consent of instructor. 

ACCT 382: CPA Examination Preparation II 
Companion course to ACCT 380. 
Credits: 
3 

ACCT 385: Independent Study: Forensic Accounting 
This course explores the forensic accountant's role in today's economy. Topics covered include fraud detection and fraud investigation techniques, valuation of closely held businesses, lost profits analyses, and various types of litigation support services. 
Credits: 
3 

ACCT 392: Advanced Income Tax 
Study of federal income tax laws and regulations, with emphasis on partnerships, corporations, estates, and trusts. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ACCT 201, ACCT 202, and ACCT 318. 

Management 
MGMT 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
MGMT 001: Career Counseling 
 Prepares students to meet the challenges of Howard University, the School of Business, and the corporate world. Develops an atmosphere of “community” among the students within the School. 
Credits: 
1 

MGMT 002: Career Counseling in Business 
Assists students in identifying career opportunities that reflect their interests and aptitudes. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MGMT 001. 

MGMT 010: Business Orientation 
The course is designed to familiarize the students with Howard University and its requirements and to introduce them to the business discipline. The course will emphasize ethics, personal finance, teamwork, presentation skills, entrepreneurship, and professional development through instruction by a cadre of business professionals, advisors, team leaders, administrators, and others. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore 

MGMT 011: Business Orientation II 
This course builds upon/extends the material covered in Business Orientation. The course is designed to familiarize the students with Howard University and its requirements and to introduce them to the business discipline. The course will emphasize ethics, personal finance, teamwork, presentation skills, entrepreneurship, and professional development through instruction by a cadre of business professionals, advisors, team leaders, administrators, and others. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Business Orientation I (MGMT 010) with a Minimum Grade of D; SB 

MGMT 020: Freshman Honors Seminar I 
Focuses on topics related to participation in the Honors Program. 
Credits: 
1 

MGMT 021: Freshman Honors Seminar II 
A continuation of MGMT 020. Focuses on topics related to participation in the Honors Program. 
Credits: 
1 

MGMT 022: Sophomore Honors Seminar I 
Focuses on topics related to participation in the Honors Program. 
Credits: 
1 

MGMT 023: Sophomore Honors Seminar II 
A continuation of MGMT 022. Focuses on topics related to participation in the Honors Program. 
Credits: 
1 

MGMT 024: Junior Honors Seminar I 
Focuses on topics related to participation in the Honors Program. 
Credits: 
1 

MGMT 025: Junior Honors Seminar II 
A continuation of MGMT 024. Focuses on topics related to participation in the Honors Program. 
Credits: 
1 

MGMT 026: Senior Honors Seminar I 
Focuses on topics related to participation in the Honors Program. 
Credits: 
1 

MGMT 100: Cooperative Program I 
Offers career-related training consistent with student’s interest. 
Credits: 
2 

MGMT 200: Cooperative Program II 
Continuation of MGMT 100, with additional responsibilities to enhance career development. 
Credits: 
2 

MGMT 300: Cooperative Program III 
A comprehensive assignment, consistent with student’s career objective. 
Credits: 
2 

MGMT 301: Management & OB 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 001, ECON 002, and junior standing. 

MGMT 302: Advanced Organizational Behavior 
Examines behavior in organizations and its interacting relationships. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MGMT 301. 

MGMT 303: Human Resources Management 
Examines the policies, theories, and practices of human resources management. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MGMT 301. Spring semester only. 

MGMT 304: Labor Management Relations 
Deals with labor management relations in different organizations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MGMT 303. 

MGMT 305: Organization Theory 
Covers the theories, structural analysis, and development of organizations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MGMT 301. 

MGMT 331: Decision-Making 
Examines the theory and application of tools, techniques, and concepts in decision-making in case situations in business 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 180, FINA 311, MGMT 301, MKTG 311. Fall semester only. 

MGMT 340: Management Development 
Deals with concepts, methods, and practices used to develop top, middle, and supervisory-management personnel in various organizations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MGMT 301. 

MGMT 350: Management of Small Business 
Focuses on the management problems and the environment of operation of small businesses. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MGMT 301. 

MGMT 351: Entrepreneurship 
Examines the issues involved in embarking on new ventures 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Finance FINA 311, MGMT 301, MKTG 311. 

MGMT 352: Entrepreneurship (Non-Majors and Minors) 
Students learn how to generate business ideas; create a business plan, mission and vision; and promote and market a company. Topics include exploring factors of business success and failure, core business concepts, economic systems, competition, production, and the global economy. 
Credits: 
3 

MGMT 353: Entrepreneurial Marketing 
This course clarifies key marketing concepts, methods, and strategic issues relevant for start-up and early-stage entrepreneurs. 
Credits: 
3 

MGMT 355: New Venture Development 
The role of the entrepreneur in starting up new businesses. Coursework includes identification of new venture opportunities and the evaluation of their feasibility. 
Credits: 
3 

MGMT 356: Entrepreneurship Externship 
Credits: 
3 

MGMT 360: Organizational Development 
Provides students with the managerial tools and behavioral science concepts, strategies, and practices that are used in an ongoing organization to improve organizational competence, efficiency, and effectiveness. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MGMT 301. 

MGMT 370: Comparative Management 
Focuses on managerial behaviors and practices and policies in cross-national environments. Provides a model for understanding individual cultural differences and the implications of such differences for organizational strategies, policies, and management behavior. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MGMT 301. 

MGMT 375: Corporate Culture 
The course is designed to acquaint the student with the practical application of the skills he/she has acquired in business school. Students will become aware of both the “survival” skills necessary to maintain a viable business career and the “advancement” skills needed to accelerate recognition and promotion. In addition,, the course will provide the student with the perspective of a career businessperson: 1) the implications of politics and personalities; 2) the core competencies that must be mastered; 3) how corporate systems affect behavior; 4) the common mistakes that should be avoided; and 5) the need for personal strategies and action plans. 
Credits: 
3 

MGMT 380: Seminar in Management 
Involves selected readings, research, and presentations of selected topics in management. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Senior standing. Spring semester only. 

MGMT 385: Independent Study in Management 
Consists of individual reading and research 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Graduating status and minimum cumulative grade point average of 3.0 or permission of the instructor. 

MGMT 390: Business Policy 
Deals with company-wide, long-term strategic decisions, issues of growth and development, and the preparation of case materials 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Graduating senior status in the final semester and completion of at least one course in each functional area. 

Business Law 
BLAW 
BLAW 305: Business Law I 
Examines the procedural aspects of the legal system as well as the substantive law of torts,, contracts, property, and negotiable instruments. Familiarizes students with the analytical and conceptual problem-solving techniques inherent in the legal process. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore standing. 

BLAW 306: Business Law II 
Continuation of BLAW 305. Reviews the Uniform Commercial Code, including sales and documents of title. Familiarizes students with the law of agency, partnerships, corporations, and other forms of business organizations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
BLAW 305. 

BLAW 307: The Law and Business of Sports 
Provides students with a basic understanding of business and legal issues in the world of sports. Examines contract negotiation, client solicitation, client management, NCAA rules and regulations, litigation and arbitration, case law, and statutes regarding sports agents. 
Credits: 
3 

BLAW 355: Comparative International Law 
  Provides an understanding of the legal systems in countries that play a predominate role in international business. 
Credits: 
3 

Marketing 
MKTG 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
MKTG 100: Cooperative Program I 
Offers career-related training consistent with student’s interest. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301, graduating status, and a marketing cumulative grade point average of at least 3.0, and chair’s permission. 

MKTG 200: Cooperative Program II 
Continuation of MKTG 100, with additional responsibilities to enhance career development. 
Credits: 
3 

MKTG 300: Cooperative Program III 
Comprehensive phase of assignment, consistent with student’s career objectives. 
Credits: 
3 

MKTG 301: Principles of Marketing 
People often think that marketing is just sales or advertising — highly visible activities by which organizations try to persuade customers to buy products and services. However, marketing is much more than sales or advertising. Even the most skillful marketer cannot make customers buy things they don't need or want. Marketing specifically involves: (1) identifying customer needs, (2) satisfying these needs with the right product and/or service, (3) assuring availability to customers through convenient distribution channels, (4) using communication media to build awareness and motivate purchase, and (5) choosing an appropriate price to boost the firm’s profitability while also maintaining customer satisfaction. This course introduces students to the concepts, analyses, and activities that comprise marketing management, and provides practice in assessing and solving marketing problems. The course is also a foundation for advanced electives in marketing as well as other business/social science disciplines 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Applied Calculus (MATH 026) or Calculus I (MATH 156), Principles of Economics I (ECON 001), Principles of Economics II (ECON 002), and Accounting Principles II (ACCT 202); Junior Standing. 

MKTG 310: Consumer Behavior 
Focuses on the individual and environmental factors that influence consumer behavior and decision-making of individuals and organizations. The course surveys various concepts, theories, and analytical frameworks to explain and analyze consumer purchase decisions and draws practical implications for marketing strategies. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301. 

MKTG 315: Marketing Research 
This course takes students from the point of recognizing a marketing problem to solving the problem through appropriate problem definition, data collection, data analysis, dissemination of the results, and utilization of the ensuing information. Both the managerial and technical aspects of marketing research are covered. Several statistical techniques for analyzing data, using SPSS, are taught and applied in the course. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ECON 180 and MKTG 301. 

MKTG 319: Sales Management 
Would you like to improve your persuasion skills? Would you like to know what makes successful salespeople effective? What about learning to partner with others to create value in your service and/or product. This course demystifies professional selling and helps students improve their persuasion and selling effectiveness. The course presents sales principals and skills required by today’s professional salespeople with an emphasis on the business to business selling environment. Students will enhance their development of a variety of skills that will serve for a lifetime. These lifetime skills include the following: communication skills, critical thinking, building relationships with customers, and ethical decision making.     
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301. 

MKTG 320: Marketing Communications 
This course provides an introduction to basic concepts used in Integrated Marketing Communications. Students will examine the role of marketing communication, the environment in which it operates, and the process by which the strategy for it is created. The course emphasis will be on the development and application of promotional communication strategies utilizing advertising, personal selling, event marketing, sponsorship, and public relations 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301. 

MKTG 324: Personal Selling 
Focuses on understanding and developing the oral communication skills necessary for success in the sales arena. These skills are eminently transferable to other situations including promoting yourself and your ideas within the corporate environment. Relies heavily on experiential learning, such as in-class exercises and role playing. Open to students of any major including non-business majors, with junior standing and permission of the instructor. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301. 

MKTG 328: Advertising 
Examines the role of advertising in marketing, the legal and social environment in which it operates, and the process by which it is created and managed. Utilizes cases to develop the ability to formulate advertising strategy and devises an advertising campaign, including the creation of advertisements. Topics covered include setting advertising objectives and budgets, creative strategy, media strategy, advertising effectiveness, agency-client-media relations, and advertising regulation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301. 

MKTG 330: New-Product Development 
Examines the process by which new products are developed and introduced to markets. Utilizes cases to illustrate the steps in the new-product development process, creativity in the product-development process, idea-screening, concept testing, business analysis, prototype development, test-marketing, phased roll-outs, and commercialization. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301. 

MKTG 331: Social and Internet Marketing 
As technologies continue to disrupt the marketplace, companies are under constant pressure to implement strategies to stay relevant, responsive, and profitable. Marketers who understand their customers’ end-to-end journeys and experiences will be successful in developing a strategic digital roadmap that meets both their customers’ expectations and their organization’s business objectives. This course will teach you a proven framework for designing, implementing, and managing a successful social and internet marketing strategy. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301. 

MKTG 335: Film Industry Marketing 
This project-based course is designed to walk students through the process that marketing professionals follow when creating advertising campaigns for films. Students will learn about the research process, create storyboards and select stills, and ultimately pitch their marketing plan to executives. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301; selection in Howard Entertainment. 

MKTG 340: Pricing 
Examines the theories underlying pricing, looks at pricing practices employed in the field of marketing, and evaluates the role of pricing in a company’s marketing strategy. Topics covered include demand and supply analysis, price-quality relationships, consumer perceptions of prices, typical approaches to setting prices, competitive pricing, and ethical and legal aspects of pricing. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301. 

MKTG 345: The Economics of Film & Entertainment 
The course provides an overview of the film industry. It will help establish a framework for understanding the unique dynamics of the film industry and the increasingly important role that technology is playing in its evolution. The course covers recent activities in the film industry, as well as concepts, frameworks, models, and analyze industry data that apply across the generate revenue in the film industry (i.e., licensing, sponsorships and promotion). We will also explore key trends that are influencing the evolution of businesses in these sectors including digitization, globalization, and audience fragmentation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301; selection in Howard Entertainment. 

MKTG 350: Channels of Distribution 
Analyzes issues involved in designing, managing and evaluating a business’ channel of distribution. Topics covered include the theory, structures, types and design of channels, intermediaries and their functions in a channel, and channel dynamics and their management. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301. 

MKTG 355: Retailing 
Provides the student with an overview of the retailing industry and the key aspects involved in managing a retail operation. Topics covered include retail consumer behavior, trading-area analysis and retail site selection, the retail image, merchandising, and inventory planning and control, among others. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301. 

MKTG 361: Computer Applications in Marketing 
Held in an interactive computer lab, the course gives students practical experience with software used by marketers. Students are exposed to a variety of applications such as desktop publishing, mapping software, spreadsheets, database managers, contact managers, web publishing, and graphic design. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301. 

MKTG 362: Marketing Analytics 
This course introduces the principles and strategic concepts related to data-driven decision making. Students learn various analytics-based techniques including data mining, data visualization, sales and profit margin analysis, predictive analytics, digital marketing metrics, and e-commerce analytics, which can all inform the marketing strategy of a business. And to develop real-world tangible skills, students gain first-hand experience in analytics platforms such as Tableau & Google Analytics, while earning industry-relevant certifications. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301. 

MKTG 370: Services Marketing 
This is a study of the marketing strategies practiced by both profit and non-profit organizations in the burgeoning service sector. Topics covered include the concept of a service offering, service blueprint, strategies for service organizations, measurement of service quality, and the role and management of contact personnel. The classroom instruction is focused on real world situations to adequately prepare students for the work force especially in developed economies. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301. 

MKTG 375: Industrial Marketing 
Examines the marketing of goods and services to commercial enterprises, governments, and other organizations for use in the goods and services that they in turn produce or resell to their customers. Course will be taught primarily by the case-method 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301. 

MKTG 380: Sports Marketing 
Marketing is a specialized marketing course that is designed to prepare students to develop skills necessary to address marketing issues specific to the sports industry. This course will analyze the field of sports in terms of the practices, applications, and strategy of mainstream marketing. The subject includes: Sponsorship, Endorsements, Licensing, Segmentation of the Sports Market, Promotional Strategy for the Marketing of Sports Products, and Emerging Issues in Sports Marketing. In addition, this class touches on the unique opporutnities and challenges associated with marketing in the entertainment industry as an aggregate. To provide students with practical experience addressing sports and entertaiment marketing issues, the class is organized around four projects. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301. 

MKTG 385: Multi-Cultural Marketing 
Examines the impact of cultural and ethnic factors on consumer behavior and marketing strategies. Special emphasis is given to major ethnic groups, including their culture, demographics, psychographics, media usage, and decision making. Practical implications for marketing in a multi-cultural environment are discussed 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301. 

MKTG 390: Special Topics in Marketing 
So how exactly should The Coca-Cola Company deal with one of their fundamental brands being mentioned by Future and other artists as a part of “Dirty Sprite” culture? What are companies doing right or wrong relative to Black Lives Matter in their marketing campaigns? This course centers on how brands use culture to market products and interact with consumers. From the use of stereotypes in the early 1900s to the integration of hip-hop partnerships in the 2000s, there is a longstanding, complex history of African American culture being infused within marketing of major corporations. This course takes students through a curriculum interwoven with foundational principles of brand management, marketing research, consumer behavior, and marketing strategy, and directly applies these concepts to real-world cultural and corporate experiences. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301 
 

MKTG 395: Independent Study in Marketing 
An in-depth examination of a topic in marketing of particular interest to the student. Projects may include a literature survey, a company case-study, a research project involving data-collection and analysis, or a survey of a particular industry 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301, graduating status, and a marketing cumulative grade point average of at least 3.0, and chair's permission. 

MKTG 399: Marketing Planning and Strategy 
This is a senior level capstone course in which students integrate and apply marketing knowledge and quantitative skills to solve marketing problems through case studies. Special emphasis is given to analysis of opportunities and competition and the development of successful marketing strategies and plans 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MKTG 301 and senior standing. 

Communications 
HUCO 
HUCO 100: School of Communications Orientation. (Required 
 Designed to familiarize students with majors offered by the School of Communications and the various professional opportunities usually associated with these majors. Students are administered the test in oral and written language to assess their skills with an eye toward improvement, if deficiencies are found. The course also focuses on listening and study skills, and on introducing students to the various student organizations in the School. 
Credits: 
0 

HUCO 101: Principles of Speech 
Development of effective oral skills in a variety of speech situations, familiarizing students with communicative processes and their effect on human interactions. 
Credits: 
3 

HUCO 108: Communications Law 
Treats legal aspects of the media with emphasis on libel, copyright, and FCC laws in advertising and retailing. 
Credits: 
3 

HUCO 202: Communication Theory I 
Survey of historical and contemporary theories of the communication process. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
HUCO 101. Fall semester only. 

HUCO 203: Oral Interpretation 
Discusses theory and practice in communicating orally the meaning in literature through analysis of form and content, along with techniques of reading aloud prose, poetry, and drama. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
HUCO 101. 

HUCO 204: Introduction to Debate 
Theory and practice in analysis, investigation, reasoning, briefmaking, refutation, and the argumentation process. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
HUCO 101. 

HUCO 205: Advanced Debate: Mock Trial 
Practicum. Participatory investigation and practice in courtroom debate, with advanced strategies and techniques of persuasion. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
HUCO 204 or permission of instructor. 

HUCO 208: Forensics Practicum: Debate 
 Students who wish to practice competitive courtroom debate may enroll in this course. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
HUCO 205. 

HUCO 209: Forensics Practicum: Individual Events 
Students interested in participating competitively in informative, impromptu, extemporaneous, persuasive, after-dinner speeches, as well as oral interpretation of literature may enroll in this practicum. 
Credits: 
3 

HUCO 213: Psychology of Persuasion 
Theoretical and practical study of persuasive processes emphasizing psychological techniques in personal and mass communications. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
HUCO 101. 

HUCO 242: Language Issues in Communication 
Examines communication dynamics in relation to language as a framer and molder of message content. 
Credits: 
3 

HUCO 307: Inter/Intrapersonal Communication 
In-depth analysis of selected theories, contemporary research review, and participatory analysis of communication behavior. Fall semester only. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
HUCO 101. 

HUCO 309: African American Rhetoric 
Discusses traditional and contemporary African American rhetorical styles and strategies of communication, including an experimental learning environment in the field. Spring semester only. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
HUCO 101. 

HUCO 319: Practicum: Human Communication Studies 
Consists of supervised practical experience in a field situation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior or senior standing. 

HUCO 320: Organizational Communication 
The study of organizational communication as it occurs at the structural, small group, interpersonal and written levels. 
Credits: 
3 

HUCO 401: History and Criticism of Public Address 
Survey of the development of rhetoric and rhetorical theory from 400 BC to the present. Emphasis on public address. Spring semester only. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
HUCO 101. 

HUCO 408: Communication Law II 
Study of research methods in legal communication. 
Credits: 
3 

HUCO 410: Negotiation and Conflict Resolution 
Legal principles and practice in settling disputes through communication. 
Credits: 
3 

HUCO 415: Intercultural/Interracial Communication 
Considers the role that culture and race play in human communication. Fall semester only. 
Credits: 
3 

HUCO 462: Effective Listening 
Assesses the student’s level of listening awareness and listening efficiency, distinguishes between hearing and listening, and emphasizes improvement of listening skills through knowledge and effort. The course focuses on receiving, interpreting, evaluating and responding as essential elements in the listening process. 
Credits: 
3 

HUCO 463: Directed Study 
Selected readings directed toward contemporary concerns in speech communications. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Permission of instructor and department chairman. 

HUCO 471: Advanced Public Speaking 
Designed to provide the advanced undergraduate student with specific communication principles and skill necessary for effective public speaking in a variety of speaking occasions. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
HUCO 101. 

Journalism 
JOUR 
JOUR 100: Multimedia Technology: Interactive Writing 
Application of various software and hardware packages in the creation of Internet Web pages; discussion and methods regarding information design, the use of text, graphics, audio and video to tell a story, promote a cause or sell a product. Principles of entrepreneurship as applied to new media ventures. 
Credits: 
3 

JOUR 201: Fundamentals of Journalism 
Develops in the student a sense of news value; introduces basic news reporting techniques; develops news writing skills; familiarizes the student with journalism ethics and copy editing symbols 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
ENGL 002 and ENGL 003 with a grade of C or higher. 

JOUR 202: Reporting and Writing 
Emphasizes actual writing and reporting under newsroom conditions; provides intensive experience in gathering and writing news under deadline pressure 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 201. 

JOUR 203: Introduction to Public Relations 
An overview of the principles, historical and contemporary practice of public relations in business, government, associations and other organizations; analysis of public relations programs; ethics of public relations practice and career opportunities. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 201. 

JOUR 204: Introduction to Broadcast News 
An overview of the principles, historical and contemporary practice of broadcast journalism in society with emphasis on methods, terminology and techniques; writing, announcing, ethics and career opportunities. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 201. 

JOUR 206: Introduction to Advertising 
An overview of the principles, historical and contemporary practice of advertising in society with emphasis on newspapers, broadcast and other media organizations; ethics and career opportunities. 
Credits: 
3 

JOUR 301: Advanced Reporting and Writing 
Deals with advanced development of reportorial skills and writing techniques, with exposure to complex issues and ideas influencing public affairs reporting. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 202. 

JOUR 303: Ethics in Journalism 
Evaluation and analysis of contemporary ethical problems encountered in the mass media. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 301 or 3723-311. 

JOUR 305: Special Topics in Journalism 
Topical reporting course designed to change from semester to semester. Topics to be offered include Sports Reporting (JOUR 305 section 01), International Reporting (JOUR 305 section 02), and Editorial and Commentary Writing (JOUR 305 section 03). 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 301. 

JOUR 306: History of Multicultural Media 
Comparison of black and white press histories-political, economic, social and cultural, emphasizing the development characteristics of the former. 
Credits: 
3 

JOUR 307: Contemporary Issues 
Examination of such major press issues as censorship, race, pornography, advertising, and confidentiality, with practice in criticism and commentary. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 201. 

JOUR 308: Copy Editing 
Overall view of the editorial concept, with emphasis on the copy editor’s job and editing copy manually as well as on the computer. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 202. 

JOUR 309: Publication Production Techniques 
Combines theory and actual practice to demonstrate the techniques of publication production and the principles of layout and design. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 202. 

JOUR 311: Broadcast Journalism I 
Emphasis on radio and television news reporting with lab and field practice in reporting techniques. Readings, writing, announcing for broadcast. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 204 and RTVF 322. 

JOUR 312: Broadcast Journalism II 
Advanced television news reporting and production. Emphasis on fact-gathering, interviewing, packaging the TV news report. On-the-air reporting. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 311. 

JOUR 313: NewsVision Lab 
Reporting, writing, editing and production for Howard NewsVision, the Journalism Department’s laboratory broadcast news and public affairs program. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 311. 

JOUR 320: Advertising Sales 
Examines the principles and techniques of advertising and advertising sales and their application to the print media. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 206. 

JOUR 321: Advertising Copywriting and Design 
Treats the theory and practice of researching, writing, and designing advertising for all media. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 206. 

JOUR 322: Media Planning and Buying 
An overview of the principles of planning and buying media: publications, broadcast, and direct mail and in-depth examination of the sources of pertinent advertising data necessary to the development of all advertising-related strategies and decisions. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 320. 

JOUR 323: Advertising Research and Marketing 
In-depth examination of the sources of pertinent data to provide background and guidelines necessary to the development of all advertising-related strategies and decisions. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 322. 

JOUR 324: Advertising Campaigns 
Develop specific advertising campaigns according to selected media criteria, i.e., newspaper, magazine, radio and television demographics. Study of the differences and similarities in each type of media that ultimately produces successful advertising campaigns. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 323. 

JOUR 325: Advertising Management 
Decision theory and techniques used in planning, directing and evaluating advertising. Emphasis on media-message strategies and media systems. 
Credits: 
3 

JOUR 330: Public Relations Writing I 
Designed to develop professional level writing skills with emphasis on external communications: press releases, news conferences, spokesperson training, backgrounds, memos, query letters and public service announcements. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 202. 

JOUR 331: Public Relations Writing II 
Designed to develop professional level writing skills with emphasis on publication design, employee communications, speechwriting and audio visual presentations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 330. 

JOUR 332: Advanced Public Relations 
Emphasis on understanding communication theory, the use of research in public relations, ethics and public opinion. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 330. 

JOUR 333: CapComm Lab 
Emphasis on planning, developing, implementing and evaluating public relations campaigns through a departmental public relations or advertising agency. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 332 or JOUR 323. 

JOUR 401: International Press Issues 
Overview of the publications, advertising and press laws as well as history, development and operation of the international press, with special attention to Africa. 
Credits: 
3 

JOUR 403: Feature Writing 
Deals with the theory and practice of feature writing for publications, including critical inspection of published examples. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 301. 

JOUR 404: Supervised Internship: Advertising 
 Offers field experience under the supervision of a professional in print, or broadcast, advertising or an advertising agency. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 320. 

JOUR 405: Supervised Internship: Print 
 Offers field experience, under a professional journalist, that requires preparation and publications or regular writing. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 301. 

JOUR 406: Supervised Internship: Broadcast News 
 Offers field experience, under a professional journalist, that requires preparation of newscasts at a radio or television station. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 204. 

JOUR 407: Supervised Internship: Public Relations 
 Actual work experience as an intern with the Public Relations Department of an organization or on a team project assigned by the instructor relating academic training to professional experience 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 203. 

JOUR 410: Directed Study 
Consists of advanced, individualized research with the department chairman or designee 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior or senior standing, and approval of the department's Curriculum Committee. 

JOUR 411: Newspaper Lab 
Reporting, writing, and editing for The Community News, the Journalism Department’s laboratory newspaper. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 301. 

JOUR 412: Newspaper Management 
An examination of the functions performed in the various departments of a newspaper (editorial, business, and production) and how these functions affect the operation of a newspaper as a business enterprise. The course introduces students to the economic and structural factors which influence media operations and practices; it also covers management problems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 202. 

JOUR 413: Advanced Copy Editing 
Concentration on the editing and display of complex news stories and other print media content with emphasis on accuracy, fairness, news judgment, content, ethical and legal considerations. Advanced practice in designing pages, using computer editing technology, copy control, scheduling and newsroom interaction. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 308. 

JOUR 414: Advanced Management Seminar 
An in-depth study of the sources of newspaper revenue, economic trends in publishing; independent and group (chain) ownership; newspaper administration policies and practices. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
JOUR 412. 

Media, Journalism & Film 
MJFC 
MJFC 100: Fundamentals of Journalism 
Students learn writing rules and styles unique to journalism with a focus on Associated Press Stylebook, Yahoo! Style Guide, grammar, punctuation and mathematics for journalists. Students must pass this course to continue in the journalism program. 
Credits: 
1 

MJFC 101: Introduction to Mass Communications 
Explores the world of mass communication in its entirety and all critical efforts that affect this area. 
Credits: 
3 

MJFC 200: Intro to Media Production 
This course is designed to introduce and test the student on video camera operation, basic lighting, basic audio, video editing and script format. A class internship at glasshouseradio.com is required. A three-minute video project and a two-minute audio project are included in the final class projects. Prerequisites: SCOM 120 Digital Media Literacy 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SCOM 120 Digital Media Literacy and sophomore standing. 

MJFC 201: Multimedia Storytelling 
This course emphasizes reporting, writing and editing skills—the foundations of storytelling across media platforms. Students explore the techniques used to research and report complex social, political and economic issues with a focus on education, zoning and development, crime, courts and government operations. Students cover news beats and produce publishable content. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 101 Intro to Mass Comm, MJFC 200 Intro to Media Production. 

MJFC 202: Visual Communication 
Students gather information in pictures, video and audio for presentation in multimedia journalism projects. Students use a variety of open source and proprietary software to edit images and sound to create and upload packages to the Web. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 200 Intro to Media Production. 

MJFC 211: Podcasting 
This lecture-laboratory course provides students with an understanding of the techniques and skills for producing effective audio for broadcast. Students learn to perform scripts for news, features, commercials and entertainment programming that can be aired on radio and/or the Internet. In pre-production and planning, production and post-production, students learn how to use the voice through the microphone, produce compelling audio interviews and create audio dramas. The course also explores radio broadcasting and production voiceover opportunities. Productions with exceptional broadcast quality may be published through the Howard University Radio Network. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 200 Intro to Media Production. 

MJFC 220: Film and TV Production 
Theory and practice of the basic principles governing the disciplines of video and film. The primary concern of the course will be to understand photo-optics, the photochemical process and the television studio through exposing students to a variety of problem-solving exercises. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SCOM 120 Digital Media Literacy, MJFC 101 Introduction to Mass Communications, MJFC 200 Introduction to Media Production. 

MJFC 221: Contemporary Topics: Race, Gender and Media 
Race, gender and class are socially and culturally constructed and represented in media. As an introduction, this course examines the mass media as economic and cultural institutions that shape our social identities and are shaped by them. This is accomplished through analyses of popular mass media including film and television. Some attention will be paid to media producers and the media audience. Using the techniques of reviewing personal experience, reconstructing knowledge and conducting media assessments, this course is designed to stimulate critical thinking and thoughtful discussion. 
Credits: 
3 

MJFC 222: Documentary Film Critique 
This course offers a general survey of the history of American documentaries and teaches students to critically examine the modes, styles, elements, processes and techniques of documentary storytelling. It explores what is documentary as well as ethical and legal considerations for the genre. It examines varieties of approaches adopted by non-fiction filmmakers engaged in producing social documentaries focused on diverse political, economic, cultural, racial, social, personal, and historical attributes and topics. 
Credits: 
3 

MJFC 225: History of Broadcast & Film 
Through this course, students will have a better understanding of the historical aspects that have shaped and led to our current state of broadcast media. 
Credits: 
3 

MJFC 250: Producing for TV & Film 
This course is an introduction to the basic principles, procedures, and techniques of television production. The Television Elective course includes video control, special effects, operation of cameras and editing machines, composition, lighting, staging, and directing, on-camera announcing and interviewing. 
Credits: 
3 

MJFC 300: Co-Curricular Journalism 
Students gain supervised, hands-on experience at one of the following Howard University media outlets: WHUT-TV, Howard University News Service (www.hunewsservice.com), 101 Magazine (www.101Magazine.net), the National Newspaper Publishers Association News Service and the Howard University Radio Network. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 201 Multimedia Storytelling. 

MJFC 301: Co-Curricular Audi 
Students gain supervised, hands-on experience at one of the following Howard University media outlets, the Howard University Radio Network, including but not limited to WHBC 96.3 HD3 and glasshouseradio.com; HUNewsService.com; and 101Magazine.net. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
none 

MJFC 302: Co-Curricular TV/Film 
Students gain supervised, hands-on experience at one of the following Howard University media outlets: WHUT-TV and the Howard University Radio Network, which includes WHUR-Radio 96.3 HD1, WHUR-World 96.3 HD2, WHBC 96.3 HD3, glasshouseradio.com, H.U.R. VOICES Sirius XM Channel 141 and HBCU Sirius XM Channel 142. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 220 Media Production II. 

MJFC 310: Multicultural Media History 
The political, social and economic history of media in the United States. Emphasis placed on technological, institutional and programmatic development, and their mutual influence on world culture. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 101 Intro to Mass Communications and sophomore standing 

MJFC 311: Interactive Editing 
Students master the essentials of editing across media platforms as well as critical thinking, research, conceptual skills along with search engine optimization. Course includes traditional copy editing as well as text editing for broadcast. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 201 Multimedia Storytelling. 

MJFC 312: Digital Design 
This course introduces students to the principles of layout, design and production of newspapers, magazines, websites and other digital media. Students develop a discerning eye for good design and a competency in graphic communication through use of appropriate professional design software to create a portfolio of your best work. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 311 Interactive Editing. 

MJFC 313: Public Affairs Reporting 
Students explore how the federal, state and local governments work and their impact on communities. Students cover beats and report on public affairs issues, taking advantage of Howard University’s setting in Washington, D.C. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 201 Multimedia Storytelling. 

MJFC 314: Computational Journalism 
Students focus on data-driven reporting and obtaining, manipulating and analyzing electronic information for journalism projects. The class is designed for collaboration between journalism, computer science, information systems and engineering students. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 201 Multimedia Storytelling or permission of the instructor. 

MJFC 315: Special Topics in Journalism 
Specialized reporting course. Offerings change from semester to semester and include Sports Reporting, International Reporting, Critical Writing, Advanced Photojournalism, Business Reporting, and Science, Technical, Environmental and Medical (STEM) Reporting. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 201 Multimedia Storytelling. 

MJFC 316: Enterprise Reporting in Diverse Communities 
Students produce in-depth content packages with a focus on underserved communities in the Washington, D.C., area. Incorporates team teaching. The course is a prerequisite for Senior Capstone: Undergraduate Thesis courses. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 201 Multimedia Storytelling. 

MJFC 317: Broadcast News Production 
Students learn to be a producer—the decision maker behind newscasts. The producer coordinates all of the elements (story meetings, video, scripts) to get his/her product on the air and meet deadline. This includes managing other students while working with constructive criticism from instructors. Students are evaluated on news judgment, creativity, quality of product, management abilities and professionalism. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 316 Enterprise Reporting in Diverse Communities. 

MJFC 318: Media Programming 
Survey of radio and television programs and on-the-air presentations, using advanced techniques in psychological and sociological principles of programming. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 310 Multicultural Media History. 

MJFC 330: Multimedia Audio Production 
This course provides students with basic knowledge of radio/audio storytelling and production techniques via practical experience for broadcast and Internet. Students work on projects designed to develop skills in audio writing, recording, editing, mixing and mastering techniques using digital audio software. The course also focuses on the science of sound and the history and business of radio. Exceptional productions of high quality will be published through the Howard University Radio Network. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 200 Intro to Media Production. Audio majors are also required to take MJFC 211 Announcing and Interviewing. 

MJFC 331: Audio for TV & Film 
This production course focuses on the techniques of recording sound for film and television and the post-production processes necessary to create the soundtrack. Students use microphones, separate digital audio recorders and digital audio software to capture sound on location and in studio. Working in teams, students cooperate to produce creative projects that build and/or enhance audio production skills. In pre-production, production and post-production, students develop an understanding of audio responsibilities for visual media; become familiar with the legal and ethical issues facing the industry and explore the effective use of sound to help tell a story. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 200 Intro to Media Production. 

MJFC 332: Music In Media 
An Exploration of Traditional and Social Media in the Music Industry This course focuses on how the music industry has evolved over the last 25 years and will continue to evolve within the Social and Traditional Media spheres and with global influence on Music in Film, Television, Advertising, Branded Content and Gaming 
Credits: 
3 

MJFC 340: Scriptwriting 
This course serves as an introduction to the fundamentals of film, radio and television scriptwriting. The course will focus on character development, story outlines, treatments and narrative script formats for the web, film, television and radio as well as commercials for radio and television. Students will finish the course with a short film script, webisode or 30 pages of a television pilot. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 200 Introduction to Media Production. 

MJFC 341: Editing for Film and TV 
Editing theory and history; advanced proficiency in Final Cut Pro; post-production, from assembly to final mix. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 220 Media Production II. 

MJFC 342: Videography 
An intermediate course in video, studio and field production, operations and techniques, editing and mixing. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 220 Media Production II. 

MJFC 343: Cinematography 
Study of the basic principles governing the discipline of cinematography and the development of technical skills. Fall only. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 220 Media Production II. 

MJFC 344: TV Directing 
An intermediate course in video, studio and field production, operations and techniques, editing and mixing. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 342 Videography. 

MJFC 345: Directing for Film and TV 
Students produce short narrative or documentary film projects to strengthen knowledge of the production process and practices in the chosen genre. Each student is responsible for breaking down the physical elements into playable steps with actors or producible steps for documentary film work. Class projects must demonstrate application of theoretical and artistic principles, unified into an organized system of visual and aural expressions. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 343 Cinematography. 

MJFC 346: Film Analysis 
This course is designed to introduce students to the fundamental elements of video and filmmaking, and to analyze how those elements are used together to create meaning. 
Credits: 
3 

MJFC 347: Producing for TV &Film 
This course provides the student with an opportunity to develop their ability to work as a creative producer in the independent film and television production sector, while furnishing the student with some key skills for obtaining employment in the film and television industry in a production capacity. 
Credits: 
3 

MJFC 400: Magazine Writing 
Students learn the theory and practice of writing long-form journalism, short gazette items and interactive narratives for digital and print magazines. Coursework includes regular critiques of published examples by student and professional journalists. Students also serve as reporter/producers for 101 Magazine (www.101magazine.net). 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 316 Enterprise Reporting in Diverse Communities or permission of the instructor. 

MJFC 401: Media Management 
An examination of the functions performed in various departments of news media companies—broadcast, digital, print and combinations of the three—and how these functions affect the operation of a business enterprise. The course introduces students to the economic and structural factors that influence media operations and practices. It also covers management problems. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 316 Enterprise Reporting in Diverse Communities. 

MJFC 402: Magazine Publishing 
The interdisciplinary course exposes students to the practice and theory in publishing a magazine across platforms. Students learn about the interactions between newsroom and business departments by studying established companies as well as serving in various roles for 101 Magazine, including business development, strategic planning, editorial and interactive content, design, advertising, circulation, production and public relations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 316 Enterprise Reporting in Diverse Communities or permission of the instructor. 

MJFC 410: Audio Engineering 
Students explore the theoretical fundamentals of acoustics, electronics, synthesis, sound design in and for music production and digital audio recordings. Along with building vital academic proficiency, students acquire a strong foundation in the use of a digital audio workstation in a music production setting. Students will begin to develop and apply practical skills relating to studio construction, microphones, microphone placement, mixing consoles, recording and signal processors. Audio engineering involves an introduction to software-based recording systems with an emphasis on editing, arranging and mixing. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
senior standing and MJFC 330 Multimedia Audio Production. 

MJFC 420: Documentary Film Production 
This course is designed to engage the student in the actual conceptualization, planning and development, and execution of a short social documentary. Class will be conducted as a workshop, seminar and mentoring sessions on concept development, research, production and post-production for documentary as students pursue topics of interest to them. Because it will deal with the interpretation and translation of actualities of the real world into the medium of documentary television, this course is intended to carry the student through the rigors of production for documentary based on sound research. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 342 Videography, MJFC 343 Cinematography, MJFC 330 Advanced Audio or MJFC 316 Enterprise Reporting in Diverse Communities. 

MJFC 421: Blacks in Film 
A survey of the history of the image of African Americans in film. Students will analyze the impact that these stereotypes have on society and on Blacks’ self-concept. The course will also examine the ways in which the images of Black people have changed (or been perpetuated) when rendered by African American filmmakers. Spring only. 
Credits: 
3 

MJFC 423: Advanced Scriptwriting 
This course is designed for the advanced undergraduate student who has completed the required undergraduate Scriptwriting course. The student must present in class the first act of a feature-length screenplay or 30 pages of a pilot for a television series. An intense concentrated effort will focus on completing a first draft of the student’s three-act screenplay or teleplay. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 340 Scriptwriting. 

MJFC 430-435: Directed Studies: Journalism 
Independent research or study, designed to help students pursue interests not served in formal courses. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
junior or senior standing and faculty/department permission. 

MJFC 436-440: Directed Studies: Audio 
Independent research or study, designed to help students pursue interests not served in formal courses. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
junior or senior standing and faculty/department permission. 

MJFC 441-455: Directed Studies: TV and Film 
Independent research or study, designed to help students pursue interests not served in formal courses. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
junior or senior standing and faculty/department permission. 

MJFC 456: Practicum-Internship: Journalism 
Continued ongoing work within the student’s chosen area of journalism involving placement in a professional setting in a supervised internship. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 316 Enterprise Reporting in Diverse Communities and senior standing. 

MJFC 457: Practicum-Internship: Audio 
Continued ongoing work within the student’s chosen area of audio involving placement in a professional setting in a supervised internship. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 330 Multimedia Audio Production, senior standing. 

MJFC 458: Practicum-Internship: TV 
Continued ongoing work within the student’s chosen area of television involving placement in a professional setting in a supervised internship. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 344 TV Directing, senior standing. 

MJFC 459: FTV Practicum 
Continued ongoing work within the student’s chosen film area involving placement in a professional setting in a supervised internship. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 345 Film Directing, senior standing. 

MJFC 460: Capstone: News Vision Lab 
Required of all journalism majors. Students produce content for broadcast and online platforms. Before graduation, students must also complete a project related to their minors—and ideally another project in their foreign languages—in this or earlier courses. 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 316 Enterprise Reporting in Diverse Communities. 

MJFC 461: Undergraduate Thesis: Journalism II (Senior Capstone) 
A more intensive Capstone course that substitutes for MJFC 460 and one, three-credit MFJC elective with department/faculty permission. 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
special permission and MJFC 316 Enterprise Reporting in Diverse Communities. 

MJFC 462: Undergraduate Thesis: Advanced Audio Production I 
An advanced study of production methods with an emphasis on studio training in producing multimedia and complete radio programs. Students learn advanced mixing and mastering techniques while creating projects with experimental audio. In-depth study and application of effects processing, dynamics processing, analogue routing and mixing, and mastering are studied. During various critical listening assignments, students will be required to write analysis and commentary. Students will be expected to produce an audio electronic portfolio that contains completed productions including audio for film, radio (commercial and non commercial) and multimedia audio for the web (podcasts, SoundSlides). 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
senior standing, MJFC 330 Media Audio Production and MJFC 340 Scriptwriting. 

MJFC 463: Undergraduate Thesis: Advanced Audio Production II 
A more intensive Capstone course that substitutes for MJFC 462 and one, three-credit MJFC elective. 
Credits: 
6 
Prerequisites: 
special permission, senior standing, MJFC 330 Multimedia Audio Production, MJFC 340 Scriptwriting, MJFC 457 Audio Practicum. 

MJFC 464: Undergraduate Thesis: Advanced TV Production I 
Independent study of advanced production techniques and principles, during which the student produces a major video product or studio production. The course will also broaden skills to include single camera production to facilitate the development of narrative television programs for broadcast and online distribution. Emphasis will be on taking creative program concepts from mind to screen with the technical mastery of equipment and facilities. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 344 TV Directing. 

MJFC 465: Undergraduate Thesis: Advanced TV Production II 
A more intensive Capstone course that substitutes for MJFC 465 and one, three-credit MJFC elective. 
Credits: 
5 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 344 TV Directing. 

MJFC 466: Undergraduate Thesis: Advanced Film Directing I 
The focus of this course is to engage students with the technical as well as creative process of directing for film. On a very advanced level, students will learn how to interpret a classic literary drama by further translating such manuscripts into the medium of motion pictures. 
Credits: 
2 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 345 Film Directing. 

MJFC 467: Undergraduate Thesis: Advanced Film Directing II 
The focus of this course is to engage students with the technical as well as creative process of directing for film. On a very advanced level, students will learn how to interpret a classic literary drama by further translating such manuscripts into the medium of motion pictures. 
Credits: 
5 
Prerequisites: 
special permission and MJFC 345 Film Directing. 

Communication Sciences & Disorders 
COSD 
COSD 241: Language Development 
Non-technical survey of the nature of language and language varieties in a multicultural environment. (Fall) 
Credits: 
3 

COSD 261: Phonetics 
dits. Teaches use of the International Phonetic Alphabet for transcription of normal and disordered speech, with emphasis on English sounds. (Spring) 
Credits: 
3 

COSD 263: Anatomy and Physiology of Speech and Hearing Mechanisms &Lab 
Examines the skeletal, muscular and neurological systems involved in the processes of respiration, phonation, articulation, resonance and audition. (Fall).. 
Credits: 
4 

COSD 361: Introduction to Articulation and Language Disorders 
Discussion of disorders and language, diagnosis and treatment overview. (Spring) 
Credits: 
3 

COSD 362: Introduction to Fluency and Voice Disorders 
Introduction of disorders of voice and stuttering, with an overview of diagnosis and therapeutic management. (Fall).. 
Credits: 
3 

COSD 367: Bases of Audiology and Lab 
Involves the descriptive anatomy and physiology of hearing along with testing habilitative and rehabilitative methodologies of hearing pathologies. (Fall). 
Credits: 
3 

Radio, TV, & Film 
RTVF 
RTVF 111: Introduction to Mass Communication 
Explores the world of mass communication in its entirety and all critical efforts that affect this area. 
Credits: 
3 

RTVF 211: Communications Research 
Designed to introduce students to the theories and methodologies of research in the field of communications. Emphasis will be placed on developing research models, planning and managing investigations and surveys, as well as on the impact of the research on society. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore standing. 

RTVF 213: History of Broadcasting and Film 
The political, social and economic history of broadcasting and film in the United States. Emphasis placed on technological, institutional and programmatic development, and their mutual influence. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore standing. 

RTVF 215: Communications Policy 
A survey of the new communications technology and systems, focusing on their effect on the formulation of communications policy. Emphasis placed on information reproduction, retrieval, storage and distribution. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore standing. 

RTVF 231: Introduction to Media Production 
Designed to give students a technical and operational foundation in radio, video and film. Requires that each student produce a short project in each medium with projects governed by the aesthetic principles of that medium. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore standing. 

RTVF 232: Basic Television and Film Production 
Theory and practice of the basic principles governing the disciplines of video and film. The primary concern of the course will be to understand photo-optics, the photo-chemical process and the television studio through exposing students to a variety of problem-solving exercises. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RTVF 231. 

RTVF 312: Contemporary Topics in Mass Communications 
Discussion of the problems of mass media and society based on readings on the subject. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RTVF 111. 

RTVF 322: Radio Production 
Lecture-laboratory course in writing, research, and persuasive communication techniques in radio production. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RTVF 231. 

RTVF 324: Broadcast Performance 
Laboratory course dealing with the basic principles of broadcast announcing and interviewing. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RTVF 231. 

RTVF 326: Videography 
An intermediate course in video, studio and field production,, operations and techniques, editing and mixing. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RTVF 231. 

RTVF 331: TV Directing and Lab 
Advanced television production course focusing on the role of the television director in a variety of productions. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RTVF 326. 

RTVF 334: Scriptwriting 
Introduction to the fundamentals of film, radio, and television script writing. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RTVF 231. 

RTVF 335: Afro-Americans in Music Industry 
A critical survey of the use and misuse of Afro-American music (blues, jazz, gospel, contemporary) by the commercial recording industry in the U.S. 
Credits: 
3 

RTVF 337: Television Documentary 
Theory and practice in planning and executing public affairs, informational, and cultural documentary programs. 
Credits: 
3 

RTVF 338: TV Tech Operations 
Students learn the different skills necessary to operate the technical areas of a television station. Classes are taught in WHUT-TV, the University-owned television station. 
Credits: 
3 

RTVF 342: Cinematography I 
Study of the basic principles governing the discipline of cinematography and the development of technical skills. Fall only. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RTVF 232. 

RTVF 345: Third World Cinema 
Treats the alternative cinema of the Third World, with a view towards film as a reflection of ideological superstructures. Fall semester only. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RTVF 232. 

RTVF 346: Blacks in Film 
Historical survey and critical social analysis of black films and blacks in film. Spring semester only. 
Credits: 
3 

RTVF 351: Telecommunications Ownership and Finance 
Treats the principles of marketing and development of buying habits among purchasers through the mass media. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RTVF 213. 

RTVF 352: Telecommunications Advertising and Sales 
Introduction to the theories and practices of sales and advertising departments of radio and television stations. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RTVF 213. 

RTVF 353: Programming 
Survey of radio and television programs and on-the-air presentations, using advanced techniques in psychological and sociological principles of programming. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RTVF 213. 

RTVF 354: WHBC/WHUR Lab 
 Organized broadcast activity designed to expose students to all aspects of broadcasting. Students operate independently in all job positions. 
Credits: 
0 

RTVF 366: African-Americans in the Mass Media 
Provides a historical and critical analysis linking the changing images of African Americans in the media to concurrent social, economic, cultural and political trends. 
Credits: 
3 

RTVF 419: Directed Study 
Independent research or study, designed to help students pursue interests not served in formal courses. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior or senior standing. 

RTVF 423: Advanced Radio Production 
Project course focusing on documentary and dramatic solutions to problems in education and public affairs programming. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RTVF 322. 

RTVF 424: International Telecommunications 
Comparative study of international communications systems, program policy, economics, organization, and control, with emphasis on Third World broadcasting. Spring semester only. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior or senior standing. 

RTVF 431: Advanced Television Production 
Independent study of advanced production techniques and principles, during which student produces a major video product or studio production. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RTVF 331. 

RTVF 432: TV Practicum 
 Continued ongoing work within the student’s chosen TV area, generally involving placement in a professional setting. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
RTVF 326 and minimum 3.0 GPA in all major courses. 

RTVF 433: Audio Practicum 
 Continued ongoing work within the student’s chosen audio area, generally involving placement in a professional setting. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Senior standing and minimum 3.0 GPA in all major courses. 

RTVF 434: Film Practicum 
 Continued ongoing work within the student’s chosen film area, generally involving placement in a professional setting. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Senior standing and minimum 3.0 GPA in all major courses. 

RTVF 435: Management Practicum 
 Continued ongoing work within the student’s chosen management/policy area, generally involving placement in a professional setting. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Senior standing and minimum 3.0 GPA in all major courses. 

RTVF 441: Documentary Film 
Surveys history of the documentary film, concentrating on the documentary as a film with a purpose. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RTVF 342. 

RTVF 443: Film Directing 
Teaches the principles of directing: methods and techniques, styles and interpretation of role acting, and stage blocking. Fall semester only. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RTVF 342. 

RTVF 451: Broadcast Management 
Functions of various radio and television stations in relation to the community and market. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
RTVF 215. 

Strategic, Legal & Management Communication 
SLMC 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
SCOM 102: Intro: Comm. Prof. Dev. 
This course is an introduction to the Communication profession and topics of significance to the field of Communications. 
Credits: 
1 

SCOM 120: Digital Media Literacy 
The primary goal of this class is to help students develop and critically examine the cultural competencies, technologies and social skills necessary for the new media landscape of the 21st century. 
Credits: 
3 

SCOM 130: Ethical Issues in Communication 
This course provides a foundation for ethical decision making in human communication including mass media. 
Credits: 
3 

SLMC 101: Principles of Speech. 
This course is designed to develop skills that will strengthen effective communication within a variety of contexts including, but not limited to, academic and organizational settings, with business and professional associates, and with family and friends. It is a performance course that is based on the study of communication theory as applied to a numerous public speaking situations and social interactions. The overall goals of this course are to improve the student’s ability to speak before an audience, to listen to and analyze speeches, to interact more effectively interpersonally with others and to increase awareness of the role of communication in our complex society.  Although natural ability is an asset, every student's capabilities in speech communication can be markedly improved through (1) an understanding of the communication process, (2) continued training in communication principles, and (3) practice in interpersonal, intercultural, group and speaker-audience situations. 
Credits: 
3 

SLMC 102: Fund. of Advert. & Storytellin 
This course has two primary areas of focus: (1) Introduce students to the field of advertising, its history and provide a general overview of advertising in the context of integrated marketing communications (IMC) and emergent media. Agency roles, corporate structure, branding and industry trends will be discussed as well as, the advertising process from research, creative, production, media placement and evaluation. (2) Additionally, students will be introduced to development of strategic communication messages via traditional and emergent media platforms. They will identify underlying themes of various stories on multiple platforms and decide how narratives will be best told strategically. Students will distinguish among different types of stories via the use of experiential (real-world) exercises to identify common themes and identify characteristics of a good story. 
Credits: 
1 

SLMC 202: Intro to Communication Theory. 
The course is an introductory approach to theories associated with the study and analysis of human communication dynamics. The perspective adopted in the course is that human communication is a complex, problematic, and conflict-ridden challenge that human beings must process and manage as a constant of daily and social life. Communication theory seeks to explore meaning in diverse and complex ways so as to provide a broad base of understanding about the complexity of meaning for social beings, and the challenge that humans have in seeking to construct it, understand it, manage it, critique it, and, when necessary, change it. 
Credits: 
3 

SLMC 203: Principles of Persuasion. 
It is without question that persuasive communication permeates throughout every aspect of our existence. We are constantly inundated with messages designed to influence or change our attitudes, beliefs, values and/or behavior.  Moreover, persuasion occurs on every level of communication, from the intra-personal through the global and even occurs within the context of the communication process. 
Credits: 
3 

SLMC 210: Intro to Strategic Communication 
This introductory course explores the basics of how strategic communications works and teaches students the strategic concepts and principles necessary to understand how of how effective advertising, public relations and marketing decisions are developed and executed. This course will provide students with an overview of the principles, history and contemporary practices of the advertising, public relations and marketing industries and explain the nexus among those disciplines. SLMC 203 explores the role of public communication, its pervasiveness in society and provides an introduction to the development of a strategic communications plans. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Sophomore standing. 

SLMC 231: Mock Trial. 
Mock Trial is designed to provide students with an introduction to communication in legal processes specifically for trial court settings.  Mock Trial will expose students to the fundamental structure of trial court litigation.  This course offers the basic principles of civil and criminal litigation and practice, including other various aspects of law, such as the rules of procedure, statutes and case laws.  It is expected that each student will gain invaluable experience regarding the principles of persuasion while enhancing their ability to argue and object utilizing the rules of evidence and civil procedure often exemplified in trial court litigation. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SLMC 203. 

SLMC 241: Communication Policy. 
This course is designed to introduce students to the structure, process and implementations of telecommunication policies. Students will be exposed to different communication issues and bring about awareness and understanding of the impact communications, particularly telecommunications, has on society. After reviewing a variety of issues that involve structure and operation of mass media system, students will examine various policies, laws, and regulations under which the media system operates. Over the course of the semester, we will be looking at public and private communication policies and their interactions and the possible impact that a policy may have on the overall performance of the mass media in society. 
Credits: 
3 

SLMC 250: Intro to Leadership and Management Communication. 
The course is designed to introduce students to an array of communication principles and practices that will provide them with a more comprehensive perspective on leadership and management.  The goal of this course is to improve students’ competence in communication leadership and management.  The course content is varied, mixing theory and practice and enabling the student to acquire both theoretical knowledge and application skill. The course differentiates between leadership and management and discusses both leadership and followership.  It also examines the various contexts in which leadership occurs, such as on the interpersonal, group, cultural, and public  contexts. 
Credits: 
3 

SLMC 251: Interpersonal Communication. 
Interpersonal communication represents the very foundation of human communication.  It is the goal of this course to explore and to develop an intellectual and operational understanding of these two disciplines in order to learn ways of communicating effectively in individual, dyadic and group situations.  Special attention will be directed to the application of theoretical perspectives to the classroom and small group settings. 
Credits: 
3 

SLMC 301: Intercultural/International Communication 
Intercultural and International Communication disciplines share similarities with respect to media, culture and political diplomacy between sovereign nations.  This course will examine the role media plays when covering issues related to ethnicity and race from the international perspective.  It will also explore the cultural and developmental communication initiatives and the critical paradigms that should be employed when dealing with interpersonal, group and mass communication interactions between “developed” and “developing nations.”  The course will also examine how International Relations (diplomacy) are impacted from a global communication standpoint.  The course will establish a credible theoretical framework that underpins intercultural and international communication dynamics in the 21st century. 
Credits: 
3 

SLMC 311: Basic PR Writing 
This course is designed to teach professional-quality techniques for writing to persuade in multiple public relations formats, including news releases, news advisories, features, backgrounders, pitch letters and other public relations writing formats in a multi-media environment. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 100 Fundamentals of Journalism, SLMC 210 Intro. to Strategic Communication. 

SLMC 312: Advanced PR Writing 
This course is designed to build upon the skills and knowledge a student gained in Public Relations Writing I (Basic PR Writing). Students will develop professional-level writing skills with a special emphasis on writing controlled communications, such as speeches, newsletters, pitch letters, public service announcements, brochures and social media tactics, as a part of a strategic communications plan. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SLMC 311 Basic PR Writing. 

SLMC 313: Public Affairs Planning &Management 
This course is designed to introduce students to the tools and techniques of public affairs campaign planning and management in a team environment. The course focuses on the branch of public relations that seeks to effect policy change through legislative, regulatory and executive action. It also builds on students’ previous studies of communications theory, reinforces their understanding of the ethical underpinnings of sound public relations practice and engages them in campaign planning while working in teams. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SLMC 311 Basic PR Writing. 

SLMC 321: Advertising Sales 
This course discusses the elements of advertising sales and marketing in the business environment. Content consists of advertising and sales promotion, selection of media, and use of advertising and sales promotion as a marketing tool, and ROI (testing media effectiveness). Upon completion, students will demonstrate an understanding of sales/marketing concepts by making actual sales calls to prospective buyers utilizing one of Howard University's media properties. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SLMC 210 Introduction to Strategic Communications. 

SLMC 322: Advertising Copywriting &Design 
This course combines theory and practice to cultivate effective creative strategy and conceptual thinking within advertising creative utilizing diverse and interdependent media. Students will apply critical thinking to create campaign solutions employing the use of traditional, social, digital and emerging media. Additionally, this course will develop principles of copy writing and design while incorporating the use of professional tools, technology and creative software. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SLMC 210 Introduction to Strategic Communications . 

SLMC 323: Advertising Research and Marketing 
This three-credit-hour course introduces students to basic concepts and methods of the research process used in developing, executing, and evaluating integrated communication campaigns. Course content includes a survey of current research methods used in advertising, public relations and mass media studies. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SLMC 210 Introduction to Strategic Communications ,Junior standing. 

SLMC 324: Media Planning and Buying 
The Media Planning and Buying course will provide you with knowledge of mass media (TV, Cable, Radio, Internet and Print) and various media options that are incorporated into media advertising strategy. Class discussions will focus on the strengths and weaknesses of various media forms, why certain media are selected and evaluated and the decisions that arise from the media planning and buying process. Class discussions, assignments and activities are designed to present, reinforce and practice skills needed to execute a successful media plan. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SLMC 210 Introduction to Strategic Communications ,Junior Standing. 

SLMC 325: SLMC Co-curricular 
  Students will gain experience in advertising sales, marketing and branding for campus media. 
Credits: 
1 

SLMC 326: SLMC Co-curricular 
  Students will gain experience in advertising sales, marketing and branding for campus media. 
Credits: 
1 

SLMC 328: SLMC Directed Study 
A supervised study on a topic chosen in conjunction with an appropriate faculty supervisor. 
Credits: 
3 

SLMC 330: Constitutional Law 
Explores the structure of the U.S. Constitution in context of political and economic developments, focusing on judicial review, congressional commerce powers, the contract clause, and presidential powers 
Credits: 
3 

SLMC 331: Communications Law. 
The course is designed to give students an overview of one of our most important fundamental rights, the Right to Free Speech. The course will peruse through the gamut of First Amendment laws and constitutional privileges that have influenced our society and have ultimately shaped our legal system.  The course will use statutory law and case law to examine the difference between protected speech and unprotected speech whether written or spoken. Above all, the course will analyze how existing law controls the operation of Mass Media and its impact on culture and systems of communication. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
; ENGL 010 – Tech Writing; 

SLMC 332: Intro to Legal Research 
Introduction to Legal Research prepares students with the necessary advanced research skills in legal research by exploring the essential legal resources used by lawyers and other legal professionals.  Upon completion of this course the student will be equipped with the vital research skills of surviving in various, if not, all legal related occupations.  This course will prepare students with research skills that will enable them to find relevant legal information to enhance any legal analysis.  The course explores all facets of legal research using book research as well as online research. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior Status; SLMC 331 Communication Law. 

SLMC 341: Race, Gender, and Media. 
  This course is to explore how gender, ethnicity, and race are represented in both news media and popular culture. A particular emphasis is on the representation in media images, texts, and sounds, and on the significance of studying race and gender. The course invokes social scientific inquiries, both qualitative and quantitative, critically examining historical, socio-economic and institutional influences that govern the representation of race and gender in intersection of other cultural influences. 
Credits: 
3 

SLMC 343: Programming. 
This course is a survey of radio, television, cable and internet programs. It examines and evaluates national and international programming strategies and imagery used to maintain competitive audience. This course prepares students for entry-level jobs in programming and audience research at radio and television stations, syndicators, radio and television networks and cable systems. Finally, this course provides a theoretical framework for organizing and making sense of the processes of programming: selection, scheduling, promotion, and evaluation as practiced by stations and networks. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 101 Intro to Mass Comm. 

SLMC 351: Advanced Public Speaking. 
Public speaking has become an important force for molding and shaping society.  In an increasingly complex world, the need for articulate public speakers, that is, those who can present appropriate, relevant, and clear ideas to listeners in a direct, open and convincing manner has become even greater.  This course is designed to provide the advanced student with specific communication principles and skills necessary for effective public speaking in a variety of contexts. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SLMC 101. 

SLMC 352: Intro to Organizational Communication. 
This course is designed to explore the various theories and concepts that are foundational to practices and applications in the discipline of organizational communication.  The nature of communication as the connecting thread in organizations and between organizations, social and enterprising, will be stressed. Emphasis will be placed on the understanding of organizations, management and leadership within the context of communication.  Students will be exposed to the theoretical underpinnings of organizations, their processes and functions.  Special attention will be given to the role of effective communication/interaction within the organization to maintain stasis and to manage change.  . 
Credits: 
3 

SLMC 401: Practicum-Internship: Public Relations (PR) 
This is an experiential learning course. Experiential learning is an educational plan that integrates classroom study with practical work experience. This course is designed to provide qualified public relations students the opportunity for challenging and educational “hands-on” learning experience the public relations, journalism or communications fields. Students gain experience and helpful career direction by working under qualified professionals in a structured business environment. Paid or unpaid, students are expected to perform duties that are similar, if not identical, to the type of work they will do upon entering the professional workforce. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
Junior/senior standing, SLMC 311 Basic PR Writing, and prior approval of internship before beginning of internship. 

SLMC 402: Practicum – Internship: Advertising (AD) 
  This is an experiential learning course. Experiential learning is an educational plan that integrates classroom study with practical work experience. This course is designed to provide qualified Advertising students the opportunity for challenging and educational “hands-on” learning experience the advertising, marketing related or communications fields. Students gain experience and helpful career direction by working under qualified professionals in a structured business environment. Paid or unpaid, students are expected to perform duties that are similar, if not identical, to the type of work they will do upon entering the professional workforce. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Junior/Senior standing, SLMC 321 Advertising Sales, and prior approval of internship and service learning experience before beginning the internship and service learning experience. 

SLMC 403: Practicum-Internship: Legal Communication (LC). 
  This is an experiential learning course.  The course is designed to provide students with an opportunity for challenging and educational “hands-on” learning experiences. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Senior Status; SLMC 352 Intro to Organizational Communication. 

SLMC 404: Practicum-Internship: Media Management (MM). 
This course is designed to facilitate the student’s transition from college to the world of work. The focus of the class will be skills training in topics related to the identification and acceptance of employment opportunities, career development and techniques for upward mobility within the field of telecommunications management. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
SLMC 321 Advertising Sales or SLMC 343 Programming. 

SLMC 405: Practicum-Internship: Organizational Communication Management (OCM). 
  This is an experiential learning course.  The course is designed to provide students with an opportunity for challenging and educational “hands-on” learning experiences. 
Credits: 
1 
Prerequisites: 
Senior Status; SLMC 352 Intro to Organizational Communication. 

SLMC 410: Social Media &Integrated Marketing. 
This course is designed to provide students with the history, theory and practical uses of Integrated Strategic Communication (ISC), along with the legal and ethical issues associated with social media. This course requires students to create comprehensive ISC campaigns with an emphasis on targeted uses of social media channels and tactics. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SLMC 323 Advertising Research &Marketing OR SLMC 311 Basic PR Writing, Senior standing. 

SLMC 431: Conflict Management and Negotiation. 
Conflicts are pervasive in human social life. There are differences in disputes involving participants with different backgrounds and goals in different situations, but there are similarities and identifiable underlying dimensions in conflict communication. Some relevant dimensions include gender, role, ethnicity, nationality, and family background. The purpose of this class is to introduce conflict as it occurs in a variety of contexts and the ways in which communication can impact the outcome of conflict. It is also designed to provide students with a framework for the systematic analysis, management and negotiation of conflict through the use of communicative strategies. Activities for learning include reading about conflict and communication, analyzing conflicts, experiencing, and evaluating communication behaviors that are effective. An introduction to negotiation strategies and practices will be presented. 
Credits: 
3 

SLMC 441: Broadcast Management. 
In this course, we will examine various broadcast companies, the organization of these companies and the underlying principles governing their management. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
MJFC 101, Junior/Senior Standing. 

SLMC 451: Intro to Training and Development. 
The training and development industry is vastly growing and reflects the information age as well as the technological advancement of the 21st century.  This advancement complements and enhances the field of training and development.  Therefore, the expertise and competence of professionals with training and development skills is critical.  This course will examine various concepts, theories and issues relevant to organizational communication training and development.  Organizational training initiatives will be introduced and explored.  To address the changing needs of the workplace we will study the importance of re-education, re-tooling and the re-development of new models.  Also, we will examine the field of training and development in an effort to understand the importance of adult and experiential learning as a tool for sustaining and/or improving organizational effectiveness. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SLMC 352 Intro to Organizational Communication. 

SLMC 490: Communication Research Methods. 
This course is designed to introduce students to the basic concepts, principles, and techniques of communication research.  Focusing on both qualitative and quantitative research methods, this course will provide students with a basic understanding of what types of studies lend themselves to specific research methods and how to collect and analyze data according to these methods. The course will provide participants with a foundation for developing more advanced research and entrepreneurial skills. 
Credits: 
3 

SLMC 491: CapComm Lab 
  CapComm Lab is designed to provide an opportunity for students to gain practical experience through working in a co-curricular advertising and public relations student-run strategic communications firm. The course emphasizes planning, developing, implementing and evaluating strategic communications campaigns. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SLMC 312 Advanced PR Writing or SLMC 323 Advertising Research. 

SLMC 493: Capstone: Senior Research Project 
In this course, students will review the major stages in the research process.  Students will conduct and complete a major communication Capstone project related to students’ field of study. 
Credits: 
3 
Prerequisites: 
SLMC 490 (cannot be taken simultaneously with SLMC 490). 



